each July 4th we have an opportunity to 
pause and reflect upon our past and celebrate our future for what we as 
a Nation have accomplished.
  Today, we can celebrate that over the nearly two and a half centuries 
we have conquered the crucibles faced: from the civil war, global 
conflicts and global deadly pandemics and an assault on our Capitol--
the citadel of Democracy--the birthplace of all modern democracies.
  The success of our democracy and the means provided to the people of 
this Nation to shape its present and guide it into the future has been 
and continues to be the ballot box.
  Martin Luther Kings Speech at the March on Washington explains the 
power of the vote to empower We The People to shape our destiny.

       ``Give us the ballot and we will no longer have to worry 
     the federal government about our basic rights . . . ``Give us 
     the ballot and we will no longer plead to the federal 
     government for passage of an anti-lynching law. . . ``Give us 
     the ballot and we will fill our legislative halls with men of 
     good will . . . ``Give us the ballot and we will place judges 
     on the benches of the South who will do justly and love mercy 
     . . . ``Give us the ballot and we will quietly and non-
     violently, without rancor or bitterness, implement the 
     Supreme Courts decision of May 17, 1954 [in Brown v. the 
     Board of Education]

  We are not governed by the rule of might makes right--which is what 
almost happened when January 6 insurrectionists attempted to overthrow 
our governmental process for electing our Nations president.
  We are Nation of laws--made by Americans on the behalf of Americans.
  Which is why it also important to affirm and understand our history 
as Americans.
  The United States came into being under impossible odds, a vast land 
mass housing separate colonies of disparate people with parochial 
interests up against the worlds sole superpower of their time.
  After the revolution, and a government was organized, King George was 
not alone in predicting its demise, because it was a collection of 
colonies trying to rule itself as a Nation.
  The first schisms appeared as the industrial revolution took hold and 
women began to push against the bonds that limited them in social, 
economic and political expression.
  Frederick Douglass a man ahead of his time championed the rights of 
women to vote and expressed the frustration of Black persons who knew 
the constitutions acceptance of slaves as three fifths of a person 
were wrong headed and counterproductive to the potential of the new 
Nation.
  Douglass, wrote about ``What to the slave is your 4th of July:

     the year, the gross injustice and cruelty to which he is the 
     constant victim. To him, your celebration is a sham; your 
     boasted liberty, an unholy license; your national greatness, 
     swelling vanity; your sounds of rejoicing are empty and 
     heartless; your denunciations of tyrants, brass fronted 
     impudence; your shouts of liberty and equality, hollow 
     mockery; your prayers and hymns, your sermons and 
     thanksgivings, with all your religious parade, and solemnity, 
     are, to him, mere bombast, fraud, deception, impiety, and 
     hypocrisy--a thin veil to cover up crimes which would 
     disgrace a nation of savages.

  But Frederick Douglass was not bitter with America, he was determined 
to perfect America by making it better through his writings, lectures, 
speeches, and civic activism.
  The efforts at perfecting this Nation are small and sometimes very 
great.
  I am happy to have contributed to this effort by introducing 
legislation that led to the establishment of Juneteenth as a Federal 
Holiday--making manifest the Nations rejection of slavery and embrace 
of the freedom and equality of rights Douglass hoped for.
  The work of past generations and our work today is to perfect this 
democracy--to keep the experiment going--until we have made it 
consistent with its founding document:

       We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are 
     created equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with 
     certain unalienable Rights, that among these are Life, 
     Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness.--That to secure these 
     rights, Governments are instituted among Men, deriving their 
     just powers from the consent of the governed . . .

  To celebrate our Nations continued existence would be hollow if we 
do not remember and acknowledge the dedication and professionalism of 
the men and women in the uniform services who fill the ranks of the 
Army, Airforce, Navy, Marines, Coast Guard, and Merchant Marines, to 
defend this Nation.
  We also owe our thanks to the nameless and faceless thousands of 
brave and patriotic public servants who are in our Nations 
intelligence agencies who serve in support of the missions of the 
uniformed services through the Executive Office of the President.
  These brave Americans know well Lincolns Lyceum speech, in which he 
warned us about the need to be vigilant in defense of our precious 
democracy--and that nothing should be taken for granted about this 
experiment.
  They know that attacks and threats on our democracy should not be 
ignored--the cost of doing so can be grave.
  They know, like many of you, that our Nation was not a century old 
when it was plunged into a civil war--with brother taking up arms 
against brother--where the soil and creeks of battlefields turned red 
with the life blood of warriors in conflict about which direction the 
Nation would go--would it be slaveholding, freedom loving or would it 
end.
  The Civil War made manifest Lincolns warning that a house divided 
against itself cannot stand.
  This fourth of July--we must rededicate ourselves to work towards a 
system of democracy that hears the voices of all citizens no matter 
their color, gender, sexual orientation, country of origin, or social 
or economic status, for if we do less than allow them access to the 
ballot box where all votes are counted as cast--it would dishonor those 
who fought and died over the centuries so that this country might 
endure.
  And we must give thanks to those who dedicate themselves to our 
Nations preservation for the next generations to come.
  I know that this is a Nation of patriots--and as we honor its birth 
we may not celebrate in the same way--but I believe that our love of 
country is real and present in the minds and hearts of the people of 
this Nation.
  Self-governance of a Nation by the people and for the people who come 
from such diversity is an experiment that has yet to run its course.
  While living this experiment for two-hundred and forty-five years--we 
have also expanded and extended the blessings of liberty to former 
slaves, women, young people, native Americans, Asian-Pacific Islanders, 
Hispanics, and LGBTQI+ persons.
  While we are still a work in progress, as each generation learns how 
best to perfect our democracy, we indeed have a great deal to be 
thankful for this July 4th.
I rise today to celebrate the birthday of 
Loretta Rinaldi who is deeply cherished by her community, her church, 
and family.
  Born to English-immigrant parents on July 17, 1924, in Los Angeles, 
California, Mrs. Rinaldi dedicated her life to education, her 
community, and family. In 1942, she graduated as valedictorian of 
Catholic Girls High School after which she took her vows to become a 
nun.
  At Immaculate Heart, Mrs. Rinaldi taught science and found her 
passion for being an educator. She continued to educate and be a 
proactive figure in her community even after leaving the covenant.
a life of service and is a persistent 
advocate. In the 1960s, she was an activist in the Immaculate Heart 
Sisters movement which encouraged the church to embrace cultural 
shifts. She was one of 315 sisters who voted to give up their vows and 
leave their lives as nuns after the opposition they faced from the 
Catholic Church.
  It wasnt long after she left the order that Mrs. Rinaldi fell in 
love and married a widower, Neal Rinaldi, who had five children from 
his previous marriage. Together, the couple moved to Banning, 
California where Mrs. Rinaldi was Mr. Rinaldis caretaker until he 
passed away.
, in celebrating Loretta Rinaldi, we celebrate the 
empowerment found in knowledge, the precedent set by courageous 
advocates, and the strength of familial bonds.
  On behalf of Californias 25th District, I extend my warmest wishes 
to Mrs. Rinaldi and her family as we join in celebrating this major 
life milestone.
Mr. Chair, I rise in strong opposition to the State, 
Foreign Operations, and Related Programs appropriations bill.
  This legislation houses some of the most important diplomacy, 
development, and defense initiatives for the United States and the 
world at-large. The programs that are funded through this bill serve 
some of the neediest populations in the world, helping millions of 
people gain access to clean water, safe shelter, nutritious food, and 
democracy development.
  Unfortunately, the bill before us today abdicates U.S. leadership in 
all of these areas. It eliminates funding for the United Nations and 
underfunds operations and staffing of the State Department and the U.S. 
Agency for International Development. It cuts funding for the Peace 
Corps and cuts a staggering $362 million from programs that improve 
maternal and child health around the globe.
  This bill ignores the existential threat of climate change, which 
affects the lives and livelihoods of families around the world, 
including here in America. Climate change is a known

threat to our national security, yet there is no funding to help 
communities adapt to drought, rising coastlines, or extreme heat, and 
no funding to stop deforestation or recurring coastal flooding. 
Additionally, there is no support for adapting to renewable energy.
  Even in areas where we can usually find bipartisan agreement, this 
bill falls short. For example, the Feed the Future program, which has 
historically enjoyed bipartisan support across multiple 
administrations, received a $50 million cut. This program has helped 
feed 32 million children worldwide in the last year alone and has 
helped their families learn to farm sustainably and stand on their own. 
This cut will have devastating impacts on children and families that 
struggle with malnutrition and food instability.
  This is a deeply political bill that will diminish Americas 
leadership on the worlds stage, make it more difficult for us to 
support our allies and deter our adversaries, and will ultimately 
jeopardize our national security. For these reasons, I ask that my 
colleagues vote against it.
today I pay tribute to Uptown Coffeehouse 
and its remarkable owner, Lorna Brennan. After more than 20 years of 
serving the best cup of coffee in town, Uptown Coffeehouse closed its 
doors on June 30, 2024. Since it first opened in Howell, Michigan, in 
2002, Lorna and her team of baristas created a cherished meeting spot, 
warmly welcoming all who entered.
  Located at the bustling corner of Grand River and Michigan Avenues in 
a beautiful late 19th-century historic building, Uptown Coffeehouse was 
truly at the heart of downtown Howell. Through grit and determination, 
Lorna restored the building to its former splendor, including a 
historic renovation of the facade in 2019. Lornas vision transformed 
this building into a vibrant coffee house, meeting place, and art 
gallery.
  For more than two decades, Uptown Coffeehouse was a second home for 
Lorna and a treasured fixture in the community. Lornas son, who was a 
preschooler when the business opened, grew up within its walls, 
celebrating milestones and accomplishments along the way.
  In addition to coffee and baked goods, Uptown Coffeehouse offered a 
sense of belonging and outstanding service to customers. Its expansive 
front windows provided a picturesque view of the city and changing 
seasons. With local art displayed for patrons to enjoy, the venue 
became a vibrant cultural hub as it hosted open mic nights, spoken word 
events, and other entertainment through the years.
  The communitys love for Uptown Coffeehouse was evident through 
numerous local awards, including the Peoples Choice Award for the Best 
Howell Coffee Shop in 2019. It was a special place, providing customers 
with memories to last a lifetime. It was often the first place new 
residents visited downtown and were welcomed to Howell. Uptown is where 
friendships were formed and regulars found a haven for their morning 
routines and work sessions. It was a place where first dates happened 
and marriage proposals were made.
  Despite challenges, including during the COVID-19 pandemic, Lorna and 
the staff at Uptown Coffeehouse always remained optimistic and focused 
on helping others. Their kindness and generosity knew no bounds as they 
supported school groups, local charities, and donated coffee gift cards 
to hospital staff during the pandemic.

  As we bid farewell to Uptown Coffeehouse, let us recognize Lorna 
Brennan and her beloved establishment that was a second home not only 
for her, but for the entire Howell community. It is with profound 
gratitude that I honor the legacy of Uptown Coffeehouse and Lorna 
Brennan.
I rise today in memory of a 
legendary leader and a pillar of innovation in Eastern Kentucky, my 
longtime friend Don Childers, best known for founding Childers Oil 
Company in Whitesburg, Kentucky. After spending a lifetime creating 
jobs and investing hope in our rural Appalachian region, Don received 
his heavenly reward at the age of 92.
  Over the years, you learn the dynamics of a meeting can change by the 
presence of one strong leader. Don Childers significantly shifted the 
dynamics of our entire region, spanning the coalfields of southern and 
eastern Kentucky, by putting actions to his words and remaining a loyal 
friend to the region he loved.
  Sons and daughters of the coalfields deeply understand the value of 
hard work, perseverance, and southern hospitality. Every venture that 
Don and his wife Peggy established over the last five decades are 
marked by those same characteristics. While Don delivered oil to coal 
mines in Central Appalachia, Peggy focused on the retail side, 
designing and operating convenience stores where customers would be 
greeted with the smell of fresh, homemade food. Established in 1966, 
Childers Oil Company has now grown from three petroleum trucks and 
three drivers to a successful family-owned business group with more 
than 40 convenience stores and a thriving restaurant featuring Peggys 
home recipes, as well as more than 1,000 employees in a region 
desperate for jobs.
  Twenty years ago, Don rallied together a group of community leaders 
to form the Letcher County Planning Commission, focusing on the 
development of educational, recreational, and economic opportunities. 
During that time, they have boldly led the charge to build a federal 
correctional facility in Letcher County to create more than 300 federal 
jobs, a new airport to improve industrial development, new recreational 
trails, improved infrastructure, and much more.
  Don was not only a good leader, but a respected mentor and teacher, 
passing down his unwavering work ethic, determination, and compassion 
to his children and those around him. Most recently, in response to the 
catastrophic flood that swept through our region in July 2022, the 
Childers family helped organize flood relief efforts and provided 
temporary housing for some families who lost everything overnight. 
Their generosity and quick response ensured flood survivors had 
emergency supplies and shelter when they needed it the most.
  Despite the challenges that have crossed Dons path over the years, 
he has always responded with the utmost grace, fortitude and resolve to 
honor his word. He has never allowed fear of criticism to deter his 
mission to make Eastern Kentucky a better place to live.
  Aside from his success in business, Don was equally dedicated to the 
Whitesburg First Baptist Church, a generous supporter of local schools 
and non-profits, and a proud U.S. Army Vietnam Veteran. He left a 
lasting legacy that will carry far beyond his time with us. I am 
eternally grateful for Dons friendship and support, as well as the 
investments that he, Peggy and their children have made in the lives of 
Eastern Kentuckians every single day. My wife Cynthia and I share our 
heartfelt sympathy with the entire Childers family and especially 
Peggy, who lost the love of her life after 71 years of marriage.