I rise today to include in the Record the 
following letter to honor the people of Corsicana, Texas and to 
celebrate its 175th Anniversary:

       Hello from the year 2023!
       My name is Jake Ellzey, and I currently serve as the 
     Congressman for Corsicana for the 118th Congress. I am 
     honored to represent this great city and to help celebrate 
     the 175th birthday of Corsicana. Corsicana was founded in 
     1848, and in the 175 years since its founding, so much has 
     changed, but the one thing that has always remained is the 
     good people who call this town their home.
       Now, I cant tell you much about what happened in Corsicana 
     in 1848, but I can give you a little insight into what it 
     looks like today in 2023.
       Corsicana is a small town in Navarro County with 26,000 
     folks and a beautiful courthouse right in the middle. Its 
     home to great restaurants like The Across the Street Diner 
     and Old Mexican Inn. The community has thriving businesses, 
     like Collins Street Bakery, Oil City Iron Works, and 
     Gilfillans Hardware. The people here are proud to support 
     the Corsicana Tigers and the Navarro College Bulldogs. In 
     2023, life is pretty good in Corsicana and Navarro County. 
     Its a community that works together. Its a community that 
     worships together. Its a community that prays together.
       I am sure much has probably happened since 2023 for yall, 
     but I know one thing that hasnt changed is our pride for the 
     state of Texas and the great town of Corsicana. The community 
     of Corsicana has always been strong, and I have no doubt that 
     that has held true through the years. As yall celebrate this 
     day, reflect on the strength of this city and our Nation. I 
     dont know what is happening in the country, but I know there 
     is nothing our nation and the people of Texas cannot handle. 
     I am proud to be the Representative for Corsicana in 2023, 
     and I send well wishes to all of the Corsicana residents 
     past, present, and future.
       God Bless Corsicana and God Bless the United States.
I rise today to congratulate 
Coach Marty Hauck, of Rolla High School in Missouri, on being awarded 
the 2023 USA Wresting Greco-Roman Developmental Coach of the Year 
Award.
  As coach of both mens and womens Rolla High School wrestling teams. 
His successes extend beyond the high school level as hes been named 
world championship coach three times by Team USA and remains the coach 
of the USA U-17 world championship team.
  Coach Hauck continues to have remarkable success with Rolla High 
Schools wrestling team. The school boasts 48 state qualifiers, 29 
state placers. and 4 champions under his leadership. This impressive 
record is a testament to Coach Haucks talent, passion, and commitment 
to inspiring each one of his student-athletes to reach their full 
potential.
  Leadership is not just something you do but is a defining 
characteristic in people. I take great pride in recognizing Coach 
Haucks exceptional contributions to the sport of wrestling. both 
within the community of Rolla and on the world stage. His achievements 
serve as an inspiration to aspiring athletes and coaches alike of what 
it means to be a leader. On behalf of the entire Eighth Congressional 
District, we thank Coach Hauck for his dedicated service.