today, I rise to recognize and celebrate the 
50th anniversary of Marquis Energy. Located within Illinois 16th 
Congressional District, Marquis serves as a cornerstone example of 
American entrepreneurship and energy leadership.
  Founded in 1975, Marquis began as a grain merchandising business in 
rural Buda, Illinois. Now, Marquis is the largest dry-mill ethanol 
facility in North America, producing clean, homegrown American biofuels 
and value-added coproducts that support thousands of farm families and 
strengthen Americas energy independence.
  Marquis is a consistent national leader in biofuel innovation. 
Through their work and advocacy, Marquis continues to shape the future 
of clean energy and rural investment, advancing next-generation corn 
markets for producers and farmers alike.

  From ethanol production to carbon capture, Marquis forges new 
opportunities that support American families and put our farmers first. 
What started as a local operation grew into a prosperous company that 
has created over 450 jobs and purchases over 140 million bushels of 
corn annually. Still today, the deep roots of family farming and a 
strong commitment to the agricultural community continue to be the 
foundations of Marquis success.
  As we commemorate this incredible milestone, I want to recognize Mark 
Marquis, Tom Marquis, the whole Marquis family, and their entire team 
for their entrepreneurial spirit, strong values, and unwavering 
commitment to their community and country.
  Congratulations to Marquis on 50 years of American excellence. May 
the next 50 years strengthen the values that make Marquis and rural 
America strong.
I am grateful for the 
South Carolina Irmo Little League All-Stars baseball team, as they 
rallied to defeat defending champions, Lake Mary, in a game played in 
Warner Robins, Georgia. This outstanding team is now heading to 
Williamsport, Pennsylvania, to compete in the Little League World 
Series (LLWS).
  The LLWS is an annual event featuring 20 teams, 10 from the United 
States and 10 from the rest of the world. Irmo is just the fourth team 
from South Carolina to advance to the LLWS, and the first since a 
Taylors team in 2015.
  The Irmo All-Stars team includes players, Ethan Bennett, Andrew 
Bogan, Brayden Gerard, Jacob Gibson, Joe Giulietti, Sutton Gravelle, 
Jake McQuilkin, Brody Miller, Palmer Steele, Ryder Tillitz, Preston 
Ware, and Brady Westbrooks. Alongside the players is the talented team 
manager, Dave Bogan, and equally talented coaches Mike Beckworth and 
Pat Gravelle.
  Having a winning record of 11-1 during the state and regional 
tournaments, the Irmo team is now preparing to face the New England 
region champion on August 14, 2025.
  On behalf of all South Carolinians, congratulations to the Irmo All-
Stars on this impressive achievement and we wish them the best of luck 
as they represent Team South Carolina in the World Series. This victory 
of the Irmo All-Stars Team is well-deserved, for the team, coaches, 
families, and community for all their hard work and support, making 
their dream come true.
CONGRATULING DEERE &amp; COMPANY VICE PRESIDENT OF GLOBAL GOVERNMENT 
                 AFFAIRS COLLIS JONES ON HIS RETIREMENT
today, I rise to recognize Collis Jones, 
Vice President of Global Government Affairs, for his nearly 37 years of 
distinguished service at Deere &amp; Company. Throughout his career, Jones 
demonstrated unwavering dedication, strategic insight, and a deep 
commitment to advancing the companys mission and values.
  Collis joined John Deere in 1989 as a financial services 
representative. Throughout his career, he has held key positions in 
Sales, Marketing, and Government Affairs, including serving as the 
director of U.S. Public Affairs before leading the Global Government 
Affairs organization. In this pivotal role, he developed Deeres 
strategy and advocacy priorities leading to legislative, regulatory, 
and public policy outcomes that ultimately benefited the company, 
customers, employees, and business partners.
  His extensive experience with product sales uniquely equipped him to 
educate policymakers and regulators about the company, its products, 
and processes. This expertise made him an effective advocate at the 
global, federal, and state levels, where he successfully influenced 
policy discussions.
  Throughout his career, Collis has dedicated himself to building and 
leading effective teams and mentoring numerous colleagues. As a strong 
brand ambassador, he has served on several boards, including the 
Thurgood Marshall College Fund and The Congressional Award Foundation. 
His dedication and leadership have left a lasting impact on the company 
and his many colleagues across the enterprise.
  Collis and his wife Stefanie, who also recently retired, plan to 
spend time traveling, enjoying family and friends, and perfecting their 
golf game. I wish Collis, Stefanie, and their daughter, Camryn, all the 
best in the years to come.
I rise today to honor and recognize Mr. 
Lewis Brown--an exceptional scholar from my district. He is a rising 
senior at Gar-Field High School located in Woodbridge, Virginia.
  He is currently studying the extraction of bioethanol from crawfish 
and lobster shells, which is an innovative way to turn biological waste 
into renewable energy. He shared his work with my office showing the 
shells of crustaceans such as crawfish, lobsters, shrimp, and crabs are 
rich in chitin, a long-chain polymer that is one of the most abundant 
biopolymers. His work highlights both scientific curiosity and a 
commitment to sustainability.
  But Lewiss dedication doesnt stop with his own education. He has 
also developed a virtual tutorial program through the MST (Math, 
Science, and Technology) initiative, where he mentors fellow students 
in biology, chemistry, math, and English. His passion for teaching and 
uplifting others reflects true leadership, service, and a deep 
commitment to both science and community.
  He is also an active member of several prestigious organizations, 
including the National Honor Society, the American Industrial Hygiene 
Association, the American Chemical Society, and the Society of 
Toxicology. His dedication to academic excellence and scientific 
advancement is clear.
, I want to personally thank Lewis Brown for his 
remarkable contributions to environmental science, his commitment to 
education, and his vision for a more sustainable future. There is no 
doubt in my mind that he will go on to do great things in research, in 
government service, and as an educator and innovator.
I am pleased to recognize Tammy Tome, 
recipient of Visiting Angels 2025 National Caregiver of the Year 
award.
  Visiting Angels is a national organization that provides in-home care 
to seniors. Each year, they recognize one of their caregivers whose 
work exemplifies the mission of the organization. With over 600 
franchises across the country, the Caregiver of the Year award is both 
highly competitive and prestigious.
  While Ms. Tome joined Visiting Angels in 2023, she has served as a 
caregiver for twenty-five years. In this short time, she has made a 
profound impact on those she serves, consistently showing clients the 
compassion and dignity they deserve. She visits clients in their homes, 
providing everything from assistance with daily needs to care for those 
facing terminal illnesses.
  Tammys clients and their families have noted the immense impact she 
has had on their quality of life. One clients wife remarked, ``Tammy 
has given our family a sense of peace, stability, and a sense of 
hope. She is widely respected for her professionalism, dedication, 
and unwavering commitment to those in her care.
  I thank Tammy for her remarkable work and steadfast commitment to 
caring for seniors in our community. Her compassion and service set an 
example for all, and I wish her continued success in the years ahead.
it is my great honor to rise today to 
recognize and commend the distinguished service of the 6994th Security 
Squadron of the United States Air Force Security Service, along with 
the 360th, 361st, and 362nd Tactical Electronic Warfare Squadrons. 
These squadrons executed highly classified and dangerous missions 
aboard the venerable EC-47 aircraft to meet the intelligence

requirements of the Military Assistance Command and the Central 
Intelligence Agency in the operating areas of Vietnam, Laos, and 
Cambodia.
  These integrated aircrews flew out of Tan Son Nhut, Nha Trang, 
Pleiku, Phu Cat, and Da Nang Air Bases in the Republic of Vietnam, as 
well as Nakhon Phanom and Ubon Royal Thai Air Force Bases in Thailand, 
from 1966 to 1974.
  The 6994th Security Squadron was primarily composed of enlisted 
logistical and maintenance personnel, intelligence analysts, Morse 
intercept operators, and cryptologic linguist mission specialists. 
These professionals maintained and operated state-of-the-art airborne 
radio direction finding (ARDF) equipment aboard the EC-47 aircraft, 
used to detect, identify, and geolocate low-powered enemy transmitters 
on the battlefield. They also collected critical signals and 
communications intelligence about enemy plans and movements.
  Working closely with the aircraft navigator, the mission specialists 
were able to geolocate enemy radio transmitters, often within a 200-
meter radius, and determine the identity of enemy units. When priority 
targets were detected and confirmed, their locations and 
identifications were relayed to ground commanders for decisive action. 
During its tenure in Vietnam, the 6994th earned five Air Force. 
Outstanding Unit Awards with Valor, two Presidential Unit Citations, 
and the Vietnam Gallantry Cross with Palm Device. It remains the most 
highly decorated squadron in the command from its origins in the United 
States Air Force Security Service to its current configuration as the 
16th Air Force. Their success came at a high cost; 17 members of the 
squadron were killed in action during the conflict.
  The 360th, 361st, and 362nd Tactical Electronic Warfare Squadrons 
were co-located with their 6994th counterparts and provided the pilots, 
navigators, and maintenance personnel necessary to operate and sustain 
the EC-47 aircraft. In flight, pilots controlled the aircraft while 
navigators coordinated with enlisted mission specialists to take 
electronic lines of bearing on specific enemy radio transmissions. 
These lines were then plotted on maps to pinpoint the exact location of 
enemy transmitters. Like the 6994th, the Tactical Electronic Warfare 
Squadrons also endured significant sacrifice, losing 19 members during 
the war.
  As integrated teams, these squadrons provided battlefield 
intelligence that was vital for ground commanders to plan offensive and 
defensive operations. It has been reported that, thanks to intelligence 
provided by the ARDF program, many attacks on friendly forces were 
mitigated, and up to 95 percent of B-52 strikes during the Vietnam 
conflict were influenced by data collected through the program.
  Even today, much of the work and results of the Airborne Radio 
Direction Finding program in Vietnam remain classified. Nonetheless, 
their impact on the success of the war effort and the broader mission 
of safeguarding the interests of the United States and the free world 
is undeniable.
  Today, we honor the professionalism, dedication, and courage of the 
airmen of the 6994th Security Squadron and the 360th, 361st, and 362nd 
Tactical Electronic Warfare Squadrons, whose work in executing the 
Airborne Radio Direction Finding program provided critical intelligence 
to ground commanders during the conflict in Southeast Asia. May the 
legacy of their service and sacrifice be remembered and honored 
forever.
I rise today to celebrate the life and 
legacy of Chicago LGBTQ+ activist, Lori Cannon.
  For over four decades, Ms. Cannon--known as ``Chicagos AIDS 
Angel--spearheaded some of the most important initiatives of 
Chicagos LGBTQ+ rights movement. Motivated by the inhumane treatment 
of those with AIDS and affected by HIV, Ms. Cannon co-founded a meal 
delivery service, Open Hand/Chicago, in 1988, to ensure that those 
suffering from AIDS would not go hungry. She then led Open Hand in its 
transition to a food pantry program known as ``Groceryland, helping 
people in need obtain much needed nourishment. Also in 1988, Ms. Cannon 
co-founded ACT UP/Chicago, a grassroots protest group which put the 
AIDS epidemic front and center during a time when the government was 
ignoring the communitys devastation. Ms. Cannon was instrumental in 
helping create the NAMES Project, bringing the Aids Memorial Quilt to 
Chicago in 1988, 1990 and 1994. Then, in 2010, she co-founded the 
Legacy Project, an organization committed to honoring the cultural and 
civic contributions of LGBTQ+ individuals, including placing bronze 
plaques along North Halsted Street.
  A pillar of the community she loved so much, Ms. Cannon was 
unrelenting in her commitment to the well-being of each individual. 
When the government and the families of those affected by HIV/AIDS 
abandoned those who were suffering, Ms. Cannon stepped up to fill that 
void--organizing, volunteering, protesting, feeding, hugging, and 
loving each person when there was no one else. As her longtime friend 
Sharyl Holtzman remembers, ``She took care of the whole universe.
Her father, Lee 
Cannon, was a champion of Native American rights. Her younger brother, 
J.H., was born with a defective heart, leading to a lifelong 
disability. After her older brother Jules suffered a horrific 
motorcycle accident, she became the caretaker for both of her brothers, 
a precursor to her life of service.
  When Lori Cannon passed away on Sunday, August 3, 2025, Chicago and 
its LGBTQ+ community lost a selfless champion. Her legacy will live on 
in the community that she supported and loved so much. I am forever 
grateful for her immeasurable contribution and impact on the City and 
its LGBTQ+ community.
my heart goes out to the family, 
friends, and colleagues of Wesley LePatner, one of the victims of the 
tragic shooting in Midtown Manhattan.
  A city is only as strong as its people, and Wesley LePatner 
represented the very best of New York. She left a lasting impact 
wherever she went: as a senior executive at Blackstone, a devoted 
congregant at the Altneu Synagogue, and a dedicated board member at the 
Heschel School.
  Wesley lived as we all should strive to live: with civic purpose, 
compassion, and a commitment to something greater than herself. She was 
a devoted spouse and parent, a distinguished professional, and a 
doggedly public-spirited New Yorker whose love for family and community 
was palpable to everyone she knew. May her memory be a blessing.
today, I introduce the Commission of Fine 
Arts District of Columbia Residency Act. This bill would require that a 
majority of the members of the Commission of Fine Arts (CFA) be 
District of Columbia residents.
  Under federal law and presidential executive orders (EOs), the CFA 
has review authority for federal property in D.C., certain military 
property, certain coins and medals, D.C.-owned parks and buildings and 
certain private land in D.C. Under the EOs, CFA has review authority 
for the design of D.C.-owned parks and buildings. Under the Shipstead-
Luce Act, CFA has review authority for the design of private buildings 
in D.C. ``adjacent to public buildings and grounds of major 
importance, such as Rock Creek Park and the Potomac riverfront. Under 
the Old Georgetown Act, the CFA has review authority for the design of 
private buildings in the part of Georgetown referred to as ``Old 
Georgetown in the act.
  Residency requirements for government positions are found in federal, 
state and D.C. law, including for members of the National Capital 
Planning Commission. The primary reason such laws exist is so that 
government officials have a connection to the residents they serve and 
knowledge of the unique issues and challenges faced by residents.
  I have also introduced the Commission of Fine Arts District of 
Columbia Home Rule Act, which would remove the authority of the CFA 
over non-federal property in D.C. However, until that bill is enacted, 
a majority of the members should be D.C. residents.
  I urge my colleagues to support this bill.
-McCORMICK. Mr. Speaker, I include in the Record the 
following proclamation honoring Band CaRiMi.

       Whereas, music has long been a unifying force that 
     transcends borders and generations, preserving culture and 
     celebrating heritage. Few bands have embodied this mission 
     more profoundly than CaRiMi, a pioneering group that has 
     played an instrumental role in shaping and elevating Haitian 
     music and culture. Through their infectious rhythms, they 
     have inspired generations and brought people together through 
     the universal language of music;
       Whereas, the bands founding members--Carlo Vieux, Richard 
     Cave, and Mickael Guirand--left their homeland of Haiti to 
     pursue education but never abandoned their passion for music. 
     Their name, ``CaRiMi, derived from the first two letters of 
     their

     names, became a symbol of unity, passion, and innovation in 
     the music industry;
       Whereas, their impact quickly transcended borders, 
     garnering international recognition with Best Album of the 
     Year in Haiti, topping music charts in Guadeloupe, Paris, 
     Martinique, French Guiana, Canada, and beyond. Their success 
     led to a distribution deal with Virgin Records Worldwide, 
     further cementing their reputation as global ambassadors of 
     Haitian music;
       Whereas, their high-energy performances have left an 
     indelible mark on audiences worldwide, from the prestigious 
     Olympia in France to the electrifying spectacle of Haitis 
     Carnival, where they performed before 300,000 fans. With 
     sold-out concerts across multiple continents, CaRiMi has 
     solidified its place in music history and has helped shape 
     and modernize Konpa while remaining deeply rooted in its 
     traditions;
       Whereas, as they reunite for their final concert at Amerant 
     Bank Arena, this momentous occasion is not just a celebration 
     of their remarkable career, but also a tribute to the unity, 
     resilience, and cultural vibrancy of the Haitian community. 
     Their music has uplifted hearts, provided solace, and 
     reinforced a shared cultural identity among Haitians 
     worldwide, making this reunion a truly historic and emotional 
     event; and
       Therefore, be it proclaimed that we, the 20th Congressional 
     District of Florida, do hereby commend CaRiMi for their 
     dedication to innovation, artistic excellence, and cultural 
     preservation, and express gratitude for the joy and 
     inspiration they have provided countless fans worldwide. 
     Their legacy is a testament to the power of music to unite, 
     heal, and inspire, and their contributions will be celebrated 
     for years to come.
-McCORMICK. Mr. Speaker, I include in the Record the 
following proclamation honoring Dr. Reverend Griffith Davis.

       Whereas, born one of eighteen children to Mr. Lindsey and 
, Reverend Griffin Davis emerged early as a 
     charismatic and gifted leader, first a performer alongside 
     his sister, to then becoming the iconic drum-major at 
     Roosevelt High School in West Palm Beach, channeling his 
     creativity and gift for leadership into divine purpose;
       Whereas, at age 21, Reverend Davis courageously answered 
     his calling, leaving behind a successful management role, 
     answering Gods calling to set out with only ten cents and a 
     command to ``Go Build;
       Whereas, after attending seminary in Nashville, Tennessee, 
     Reverend Davis returned to his community with his wife, Mrs. 
     Hughetta Davis, and their three sons, Reverend Griffin Davis 
     Jr., Denzel Davis, and Sydney Davis, to establish Hilltop 
     Missionary Baptist Church, a sanctuary built on prayer, 
     faith, generosity, and service;
       Whereas, for more than 55 years, Reverend Davis led his 
     congregation by powerful example, ringing in each new year 
     with a forty-day fast and prayer, instilling the 
     transformative power of spiritual discipline and neverending 
     faith;
       Whereas, his ministry extended far beyond the church walls, 
     touching the lives of the most vulnerable through food and 
     clothing drives, housing initiatives, compassionate counsel, 
     and tireless community advocacy, all of which are reminiscent 
     of his mantra that ``Being nice costs nothing, but it pays a 
     million;
       Whereas, his legacy as a servant-leader, spiritual father, 
     and pillar of goodwill lives on in the countless lives he 
     touched and in the enduring foundation of Hilltop Missionary 
     Baptist Church; and
       Therefore, be it resolved that we, Floridas 20th 
     Congressional District, proudly honor and celebrate the 
     contributions, wisdom, and life, of Reverend Griffin Davis 
     for his spiritual guidance, unwavering dedication to service, 
     and elevation of morality.
it is my honor to speak in celebration of a 
group of workers and artists who entertain live audiences in every 
state across the country: the theatrical chorus. I am pleased to 
recognize 2025 as ``A Chorus Year.
  From Oklahoma! to Hamilton, some of the greatest art to come out of 
the United States has been musical theatre, and a staple of this art 
form is the chorus.
  The chorus has always been more than a group of singers and dancers 
filling up a stage. It is an integral part of theatrical storytelling, 
as well as a major player in labor history. The historic actors strike 
of 1919 that established union protections for live performers 
succeeded in large part because of the women and men of the chorus who 
formed their own union and walked off Broadway stages in large numbers 
to join the fight.
  And 2025 is a particularly auspicious year to celebrate the chorus. 
This year marks the 70th anniversary of the merger between Chorus 
Equity Association and Actors Equity Association into the Equity that 
exists today, protecting the rights of actors and stage managers in 
live theatre across the U.S.
  I want to recognize not only the talent of chorus performers, but 
their great skilled labor and tireless work ethic. They make it all 
look easy, but their ongoing contribution to American culture and a 
healthy entertainment industry is born of fierce commitment and 
dedication to their craft. They exemplify the best of America: many 
people working as individuals to build something amazing together.
I rise today to recognize and honor 
Officer Terry Caldwell, who is retiring after an extraordinary 41-year 
career in law enforcement, including 28 years of dedicated service with 
the Grapevine Police Department.
  Officer Caldwell began his distinguished career in 1984 with the 
Dallas County Sheriffs Department and, over the course of his service, 
earned multiple certifications and commendations, amassing more than 
3,700 hours of professional training. During his tenure with the 
Grapevine Police Department, Officer Caldwell served 25 of his 28 years 
as a School Resource Officer in the Grapevine-Colleyville Independent 
School District, a role he considered his calling. He was deeply 
committed to working alongside the young people of our community, 
serving as a trusted role model and mentor to thousands of students 
across elementary, middle, and high schools.
  Officer Caldwells unwavering dedication, professionalism, and 
service have left an indelible mark on the community he has faithfully 
served. His career stands as a testament to the values of integrity, 
compassion, and commitment that define the very best of law 
enforcement.
  On behalf of the 24th Congressional District of Texas, I congratulate 
Officer Terry Caldwell on his well-earned retirement and thank him for 
his decades of service to our community.
I rise today to honor a remarkable milestone 
in our Nations history, the 50th anniversary of the Springfield Armory 
National Historic Site (NHS).
  Established during the Revolutionary War in 1777 as the ``Arsenal at 
Springfield, the site was recommended to George Washington by General 
Henry Knox for its strategic location along the Connecticut River and 
its proximity to four major roads that connected to New York City, 
Boston, Albany, and Montreal. The Arsenal at Springfield played a 
critical role in the war effort, both manufacturing cartridges and gun 
carriages and storing muskets, cannons, and other weaponry.
  In January 1787, the Armory was the site of Shays Rebellion, an 
uprising led by American Revolutionary War veteran Daniel Shays in 
response to economic hardships faced by farmers after the Revolutionary 
War. Thousands of Shays Regulators marched on the Springfield Armory, 
hoping to seize its weaponry and force a change of government. The 
rebellion directly influenced the delegates at the Constitutional 
Convention later that year, with James Madison citing it as a warning 
for the need for a stronger federal government.
  The Springfield Armory was officially established by George 
Washington in 1794 and played an essential role in shaping Americas 
military and industrial strength. For nearly two centuries, the Armory 
provided the tools necessary to defend our Nation and served as a hub 
of innovation and craftsmanship. In 1974, the site was officially 
designated a National Historic Site and was entrusted to the 
stewardship of the National Park Service.
  Once the home of our Nations first armory, the Springfield Armory 
National Historic Site is now home to the worlds largest historic U.S. 
military small arms collection, commemorating the innovative 
craftsmanship and ingenuity that enabled the production of the most 
superior firearms for nearly two centuries. Thousands of visitors come 
every year to not only marvel at this collection, but also learn about 
the regions rich history and its critical role in the founding of our 
Nation.
  On Saturday, August 16, 2025, the Springfield Armory NHS will host a 
community-wide celebration on the scenic grounds of the Springfield 
Armory and Springfield Technical Community College to mark this 
historic occasion. This free, family-friendly festival will honor five 
decades of preserving the rich military, industrial, and social legacy 
of the Armory.
  I commend the Springfield Armory National Historic Site, 
Superintendent Fellner and her team, and our entire western 
Massachusetts community for honoring the past and enriching the 
present. Heres to another fifty years of education, inspiration, and 
connection through this treasured historic landmark.
I rise today to honor and recognize Dr. 
Shamira A. Brown--a dedicated researcher, a passionate toxicologist, 
and a trailblazer in the field of environmental work.
  Dr. Brown began her academic journey at Southern University, where 
she earned a Bachelor of Science in Environmental Chemistry. Her 
pursuit of knowledge did not stop there. She went on to earn her MS/
Ph.D. with a concentration in Environmental Fate and Exposure from the 
same institution, demonstrating both her commitment and excellence in 
the scientific field.
  In 2003, Dr. Brown further distinguished herself by studying and 
conducting research at Oxford University, expanding her global 
perspective and deepening her expertise.
  Dr. Browns research has addressed some of the most complex issues in 
environmental toxicology and public health. These include the fate and 
transport of per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS), pesticides 
contamination in groundwater, and the development of green chemistry 
solutions to reduce industrial pollution. Her groundbreaking 
investigations into the disproportionate effects of environmental 
toxins on disadvantaged communities have raised awareness around 
environmental justice and equity.
  As a toxicologist, Dr. Brown does not simply study issues, she 
creates pathways toward solutions that focus on scientific progress and 
community health. Throughout her career, Dr. Brown has also been a 
committed mentor and advocate for underrepresented students in STEM. 
Her leadership and dedication have inspired many young scientists, 
including her own six children, some of whom have pursued environmental 
research. Her impact goes beyond the classroom and the lab, shaping a 
future for science that is more innovative and more inclusive and 
representative of the communities it serves.
. She worked as an Environmental Protection Specialist for the 
Federal Aviation Administration from 2004 to 2018. She also served as a 
National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) and Endangered Species 
Specialist for the Office of Airports and Environmental Planning. 
Additionally, she was an Environmental Fate Consultant for pesticides 
and persistent chemical pollutants (PCPs) in air, soil, and water.
  I want to personally thank Dr. Brown for her lifelong dedication to 
research, scientific advancement, and the mentorship of future 
generations. Her contributions have not only elevated the standards in 
her field, but have also opened doors for countless others.
, I ask that you and my colleagues join me in recognizing. 
Dr. Shamira A. Brown for her outstanding achievements and unwavering 
commitment to science and education. She is a true asset to our 
community and to our environment and I wish her the best of luck in her 
research to come.