I rise today to congratulate my constituent, 
Alexander Andrews, upon his acceptance to the United States Naval 
Academy.
  As a future midshipman, he will be joining the ranks of the worlds 
most elite naval force, guided by the motto: ``Semper Fortis
  The service and sacrifice of Americas military personnel have 
safeguarded our Nation since its inception, defending our way of life 
from Lexington to Normandy.
  And throughout our history, American servicemembers have demonstrated 
tremendous courage and strength, beating back tyranny to the ends of 
the earth.
  I was glad to sponsor Alexanders nomination, and I am confident that 
his talents will distinguish him among his peers during his time at the 
Academy and thereafter.
  I congratulate Alexander. I know that he will make this Nation proud.
I rise today to congratulate my constituent, 
Jack Gray, upon his acceptance to the United States Merchant Marine 
Academy.
  As a future midshipman, he will be joining the ranks of the worlds 
most elite naval force, guided by the motto: ``Acta Non Verba
  The service and sacrifice of Americas military personnel have 
safeguarded our Nation since its inception, defending our way of life 
from Lexington to Normandy.
  A vital part of our Nations maritime operations, the Merchant 
Marines duties are dynamic, transporting cargo and passengers during 
peacetime and serving as an auxiliary to the United States Navy during 
times of war.
  I was glad to sponsor Jacks nomination, as his dynamism reflects the 
mission of the branch which he will soon serve. I am confident that his 
talents will distinguish him among his peers during his time at the 
Academy and thereafter.
  I congratulate Jack. I know that he will make this Nation proud.
I rise today to congratulate my constituent, 
Kai Agyemang, upon his acceptance to the United States Air Force 
Academy.
  As a future cadet, he will be joining the ranks of the worlds most 
fearsome fighting force, the United States Air Force.
  Guided by the motto ``Aim High . . . Fly-Fight-Win the U.S. Air 
Force is the worlds preeminent force in air, space, and cyberspace.
  Throughout our history, American Airmen have demonstrated tremendous 
courage and strength, beating back tyranny to the ends of the earth.
  I was honored to sponsor Kais nomination, and I am confident that 
his talents will distinguish him among his peers both during his time 
at Air Force Academy and thereafter.
  I congratulate Kai. I know that he will make this Nation proud.
I rise today to recognize and honor Culver 
Police Chief Wayne Bean for more than four decades of dedicated service 
to the Town of Culver and the broader law enforcement community as he 
enters retirement.
  Chief Bean, a lifelong resident of Culver and Union Township, 
graduated from Culver Community Schools and began his law enforcement 
career as a reserve deputy marshal in 1980 for the Culver Police 
Department, becoming a full-time deputy in 1982. His leadership quickly 
stood out as he was promoted to deputy chief in 1991 and chief of the 
Culver Police Department just a few years later, a role he has held 
with distinction for more than two decades.
  Throughout his career, Chief Bean has served with professionalism, 
bravery, and compassion. He supported law enforcement efforts beyond 
Culver, including service as a reserve officer with the Argos Police 
Department in the 1990s and again from 2007 to 2012.
  Chief Bean has been involved in numerous complex and critical 
investigations. In one particularly heroic incident, he assisted in 
defusing a dangerous standoff, disarming an armed individual who was 
threatening family members, thereby preventing serious harm or loss of 
life.
  Chief Bean also championed traffic safety and enforcement, recording 
over 60 DUI arrests in a single year, and worked tirelessly to 
modernize the departments equipment and operations to better serve the 
community.
  Beyond his law enforcement duties, Chief Bean has remained active in 
civic life. He is a long-standing member of the local Fraternal Order 
of Police, having served as president and currently serving as vice 
president.
, Chief Wayne Beans legacy is one of steadfast 
dedication, courage, and unwavering commitment to public safety. As he 
retires, I join the residents of Culver and law enforcement 
professionals across the Hoosier state in thanking him for his 
outstanding service and wishing him all the best in the years ahead.
I rise today to recognize an 
Altoona native, Penn State graduate, and newest Captain of D.C. Fire 
and EMS, Jordan Wiley. Jordan studied Emergency Medicine at the 
University of Pittsburgh before receiving his Master of Public 
Administration from Penn State University.
  In October of 2014, Jordan joined the D.C. Fire and EMS Department as 
a Firefighter and Paramedic. In nearly eleven years of service, Jordan 
was awarded the departments `Paramedic of the Year award in 2019 and 
earned promotions to Sergeant in 2020, Lieutenant in 2022, and Captain 
in 2024. However, the most important milestone for Jordan was when he 
met his wife Catelyn and started a family with their two children, 
Russell and Madison.
  Jordan has dedicated so much of his time, in and out of the 
firehouse, to serving his fellow community members. As a cancer 
survivor himself, Jordan is instrumental in efforts to promote cancer 
awareness and prevention within the department. Cancer-related deaths 
are rising among firefighters, and Jordans advocacy will help save 
lives.
  Jordan is also an advocate for the National Marrow Donor Program, 
working to save lives by connecting bone marrow donors with patients 
who have life-threatening blood disorders such as leukemia, lymphoma, 
and sickle cell.
  Jordan has faithfully served his community and fellow Americans for 
more than a decade, both as a paramedic and as an advocate for cancer 
patients, and I know his parents, Frank Wiley and Dr. Mary OLeary 
Wiley, are incredibly proud of the man and father he has become.
  Along with everyone in Pennsylvanias 13th Congressional District, I 
want to congratulate Captain Wiley on his selection to lead the D.C. 
Fire and EMS Department and thank him for his continued dedication to 
our fellow Americans.
I rise today to honor Didi Krishna 
Kumari, a revered spiritual leader, humanitarian, and educator whose 
lifelong commitment to service has uplifted communities across the 
globe.
  Born on May 9, 1961, Didi Krishna began her spiritual journey at the 
age of three under the guidance of saints Sadhu T.L. Vaswani and Dada 
J.P. Vaswani. She now serves as the head of the Sadhu Vaswani Mission, 
leading with humility, wisdom, and dedication to service.
  Founded in the 1930s, the Sadhu Vaswani Mission has flourished under 
Didi Krishnas leadership into a global force for compassion and 
healing. With more than 60 centers across five continents, the Mission 
carries out extensive work in education, health care, spiritual 
development, and humanitarian relief. For over ninety years, it has 
served those most in

need--uplifting the poor, the sick, the voiceless, and the forgotten.
  To many, Didi Krishna is more than a leader; she is a spiritual guide 
and a saint-like presence. Her gentle demeanor, deep compassion, and 
unwavering devotion have earned her the love and respect of people from 
all walks of life. She leads not with fanfare, but with quiet strength 
and grace, always placing service before self.
, Didi Krishna Kumaris tireless efforts are a testament 
to the profound impact one individual can have through a life of 
purpose and humility. It is my honor to recognize her extraordinary 
contributions to humanity.
HONORING RICHARD STEINS CONTRIBUTIONS TO ORANGE COUNTYS ARTS AND ARTS 
                             of california
I rise today to recognize the contributions 
of Richard Stein, a leading advocate and partner for the arts and arts 
education across Orange County, California.
  Richard, who recently stepped down as the President and CEO of Arts 
Orange County, led the organization for more than 14 years. Under his 
leadership, Arts Orange County addressed the needs of the arts and 
culture community in Orange County as a trailblazer among nonprofit 
arts councils worldwide--augmenting traditional arts agency programs 
and services with its unique role as the communitys go-to arts 
consultant to government, education, and nonprofit organizations. This 
has helped enable Arts Orange County, which is celebrating its 30th 
anniversary, to become a leading advocate for the arts and arts 
education on the local, state, and national level. Richards 
stewardship also led Arts Orange County to become a strong supporter of 
the Congressional Arts Competition, providing funds for winning artists 
to travel to Washington, D.C. to see their artwork displayed in the 
U.S. Capitol.
  Prior to his appointment at Arts Orange County in August 2008, Rick 
transformed the Laguna Playhouse in Laguna Beach into a major resident 
professional theatre over the course of more than 17 years as its 
Executive Director, growing its annual budget of $700,000 to $7 million 
and producing more than 100 plays, including two national touring 
productions. He also directed many notable productions at this venue, 
including several premieres.
  Rick first came to Orange County in 1987, to serve as Managing 
Director of the Grove Shakespeare Festival in Garden Grove following a 
five-year stint as Director of Lincoln Theater at Connecticuts 
University of Hartford. Before that, he held management positions with 
two major symphony orchestras.
  Rick holds degrees in English from Columbia and Syracuse Universities 
and returned to Columbia for postgraduate study in drama on a National 
Endowment for the Humanities summer fellowship. He was sent to Korea on 
a cultural exchange by the International Theatre Institute-US, served 
on the executive committee of the League of Resident Theatres, and was 
a contributing writer to AMERICAN THEATRE magazine.
  Rick is a former Chair of the John Wayne Airport Arts Commission, 
past President of the Association of Fund Raising Professionals-Orange 
County Chapter, and twice former Co-Chair of National Philanthropy Day-
Orange County. From 2009 to 2022, he served on the board of 
Californians for the Arts/California Arts Advocates, a statewide 
organization promoting the interests of the arts community, including 
three years as its President.
  Demonstrating his commitment to fostering an appreciation of the arts 
in the next generation, Richard has been a guest lecturer at University 
of California, Irvine and California State University, Fullerton, and 
was a commencement keynote speaker for the Laguna College of Art and 
Design. He has served as a panelist or site visitor for the National 
Endowment for the Arts, California Arts Council, Western States Arts 
Federation, Los Angeles County Arts Commission, City of Los Angeles 
Department of Cultural Affairs, City of San Diego Commission for Arts 
and Culture, Riverside Arts Council, New England Foundation for the 
Arts, Louisville Fund for the Arts, City of Pasadena, and the 
Connecticut Commission on the Arts, for which he also produced its 
State Arts Awards.
  Although his career has largely been in the theatre, Ricks first 
post after finishing graduate school was as Executive Director of a 
local arts agency, Oswego County Council on the Arts, located in 
Fulton, New York. In fact, the theatre company Richard co-founded in 
1977, Contemporary Theatre of Syracuse, continues operation today as 
The Red House, a highly successful producer of multi-disciplinary arts. 
He is a 33-year resident of San Juan Capistrano with his wife, Alison, 
an artist.
  I call on my colleagues to join me in celebrating Richard Steins 
leadership and stewardship of the arts in Orange County and thank him 
for helping bring arts and culture to our community and country.
it is with great pleasure to honor the life 
of Ms. Alfonsina Diaz--a World War II survivor; lifelong educator; a 
woman of God; mother, grandmother, and great grandmother to her family 
and community; and most importantly, her legacy of 100 years of life 
that demonstrate the values of spiritual strength and the significance 
of family.
  Known to her family and friends as Ancin, she is the eldest of six 
children born to Maria Santos Tanaka Diaz and Joaquin Flores Diaz. 
Despite her childhood and much of her youth remembering the painful 
occupation of the Japanese during World War II, she intentionally lives 
and chooses to carry her life with the spirit of resilience and joy. A 
fond memory of her youth includes working alongside her sister Cecilia 
Tanaka Diaz Reyes, first cousin Matilde Cruz Baron, and aunt Asuncion 
Tanaka Santos at Tommys Soda Fountain. Owned by her uncle Tom Santos 
Tanaka, Sr. and father Joaquin Flores Diaz, it was a popular spot for 
the teenagers during the 1950s. She always had fun when she worked.
  After graduating from high school, she worked at C.L. (previously 
Sinajana) Elementary as an elementary school teacher for the 1st to 3rd 
grades. She met her husband and theyve stayed together since marrying 
in June of 1950. When they moved to Agana Heights, theyve welcomed 
their seven children: Carmelita, Robert, Marie, Joaquin, Martha, 
Daniel, and Nora. As she raised her family, she continued to be a full-
time teacher.
  The love she had for her job can be felt through her previous and 
present students--

many of which have shared fond memories during their time together. 
About 10 years ago, a former student accidentally bumped into Ancin and 
asked for a picture. He intended to share it with his friends in Los 
Angeles who all went to the same elementary school. Another student, 
who is now a proud retired registered nurse, shared her experiences 
with Ancin. She shares that when she was in 3rd grade, Ancin had a 
patient and nurturing demeanor that made learning fun and easy. She was 
also the pioneer for many of these students ``firsts--first person to 
introduce students to the Scholastic Book Club, fostering the love of 
reading classics; first person to take them on a field trip to Fena 
Dam/Lake; etc.
  Another fond memory a student shared was the performance during the 
Christmas Pageant, where everyone dressed as angels with tinsel halos 
and wings and sang to their hearts content. She was also noted to have 
the best dresses.
  Moreso, she was best remembered in awe for her strength and passion 
of raising a family of seven while being a full-time educator in an era 
where it was considered progressive at the time.
  Her influence reached beyond her students started many of the 
traditions that her family has come to love. Her daughter recalls one 
specific tradition of setting up and reciting the Nobena Nino every 
year on the front porch. The Nativity they used was given to Ancin by 
her mom and is now with her grandniece Norene Reyes Aldridge. Her 
children and her grandchildren credit Ancin for their love of dancing 
and for the recipe for the best homemade flour titiyas served during 
large celebrations.
  Although she was the oldest, only she and her youngest sibling Maria 
Tanaka Diaz Nauta remain. She has survived all three of her sons yet 
remains loving and faithful. Her eyes and smile speak genuinely when 
she bids goodbye with a ``Thank you, God bless you.
  Ancin attributes her longevity to two things: physical activity, and 
interaction with others, especially with the youth. Two wonderful 
lessons I think we can all take away from such a life well-lived 
centered on family and intentionally finding gratitude in every day.
HONORING THE RECIPIENTS OF THE ENGLISH EMPOWERMENT CENTERS 63RD 
                              of virginia
I seek to recognize the English Empowerment 
Center (EEC) in Falls Church, Virginia and to congratulate the 
volunteers, instructors, students, community partners, and many others 
who will be recognized at the 63rd EEC Recognition Ceremony.
  The mission of the English Empowerment Center is to teach adults the 
basic skills of reading, writing, speaking, and understanding English 
so they can access employment and education opportunities and more 
fully and equitably participate in the community.
  EEC provides the crucial first steps of language and literacy 
proficiency for workplace, citizenship, and community integration to 
help adults make measurable improvements in their lives. Last year, 
they served more than 2,000 adult learners, with the help of over 500 
volunteers who gave 24,000 plus hours of service.
  Each year the EEC recognizes students and members of the community 
who have contributed their time, energy, and resources to achieving the 
organizations mission.
  EEC will also award the prestigious Patricia M. Donnelly Merit 
Scholarship, the Mid Allen Ries Award, and they will also announce the 
inaugural Gerry E. Connolly Empowerment Award. I include in the Record 
the following recipients:

       Community Partners of the Year: Alexandria City Public 
     Schools Family and Community Engagement Center (FACE), 
     MarginEdge, The Wollenberg Foundation.
       Volunteers of the Year: Zenaida Bastidas, Gail Gile, Linda 
     Zenker.
       Student Speakers: Juanita Cadena, Vanessa Fernandez, 
     Shereen Habib.
       Patricia M. Donnelly Merit Scholarship Recipient: Firoza 
     Omar.
       Mid Allen Ries Award: Cassandra Kramer.

  I also want to recognize and include in the Record, those volunteers 
who are celebrating service anniversaries with EEC. These volunteers 
are being recognized for the service milestone of years:

       25 years: Elizabeth McBurney, Elizabeth Nelson
       20 years: Fred Hufford, Julie Kehrli, Judith Penniman
       15 years: Margaret Breen, Rebekah Bundang, Janet Fedak, 
     Enebish Sanran, Chris Wollenberg
       10 years: Barbara Callen, Keith Clark, Sally Eckard, Linton 
     Favours, Kyle Grieser, Gordon Hay, Linda Johnsen, Melissa 
     Krut, Monica Nunez, Wendy Shapiro, Jody Sweet, Jane Winant, 
     Loren Zander
       5 years: Ann Anderson, Sajida Arif, Rana Azad, Kim 
     Baumgartner, Stacey Becker, Stephanie Buchanan, Kobi Carter 
     Eidman, Annette Clayberg, Ida Draim, Ameer Ghaderi, Jeanne 
     Johnson, Ayuko Kimura-Fay, Kathy Larkin, Margery Leveen Sher, 
     Vineeta Malkani, Stacy OConnor, Rita Povich, Tiffany Taber 
     Prevost, Albert Turri

  Education continues to be one of lifes most essential tools and as 
weve seen in our own community, literacy is the foundation for 
unlocking education, career paths, and personal growth at any age. As a 
lifelong learner and a current student at George Mason University, I 
know firsthand the power of education. I am deeply grateful to the 
Center and its remarkable, participants, volunteers, and staff for 
championing literacy as a lifelong and life-changing skill.
  I ask my colleagues to join me in commending the English Empowerment 
Center and congratulating each of the honorees of the 63rd EEC 
Recognition Ceremony.
  I wish all of them great success in their future endeavors.
today, I introduce the District of Columbia 
Zoning Commission Home Rule Act. This bill would give the District of 
Columbia the authority to appoint all members of the D.C. Zoning 
Commission (Commission). Currently, the membership of the Commission 
consists of two federal officials the (the Architect of the Capitol 
(AOC) and the Director of the National Park Service (NPS)) and three 
members appointed by the D.C. mayor, subject to D.C. Council approval. 
Federal officials are members of the Commission even though the 
Commission has no authority over federal property.
  Land use is a quintessential local matter. Despite the D.C. Home Rule 
Act, which gave D.C. authority over local matters, 40 percent of the 
members of the Commission are federal officials, who are not 
accountable to the more than 700,000 D.C. residents. The federal 
government would lose nothing under this bill because the federal 
governments land-use interests in the Nations capital are protected 
by federal law and federal agencies.
  The Commission creates the zoning maps and regulations, which must 
``not be inconsistent with the comprehensive plan for the national 
capital. The mayor is responsible for the local elements of the 
comprehensive plan, subject to Council approval. The National Capital 
Planning Commission (NCPC), which is the central planning agency for 
the federal government in D.C. and approves federal projects in D.C., 
is responsible for the federal elements of the comprehensive plan. This 
bill would not alter the comprehensive plan process or the authority of 
NCPC and the Commission.
  This bill would immediately remove the AOC and the NPS Director from 
the Commission, and the Commission would, at least initially, consist 
solely of three mayoral appointees. D.C. would have the authority to 
reconstitute the membership of the Commission through local 
legislation.
  This bill is an important step to increase D.C. home rule. I urge my 
colleagues to support this bill.
I include in the Record the following 
newsletter to give an update to my constituents on the One Big 
Beautiful Bill Act, post office disruptions, National Police Week, and 
Helene recovery.

       Dear Friend,
       Last week, the U.S. House of Representatives passed H.R. 
     1--better known as the ``One Big Beautiful Bill--a historic 
     piece of legislation that will:
       Keep taxes low for working Americans.
       Strengthen border security.
       Rebuild our military.
       Drive American energy independence.
       Protect entitlement programs so the Americans who need them 
     have them.
       This bill is key to fulfilling the America First agenda. 
     Below, you will find some of the most important components of 
     the One Big Beautiful Bill that will make a difference in our 
     mountain communities.
       Providing tax relief for workers and families
       Provides a $5,000 tax cut for the average American family.
       Eliminates taxes on tips, overtime, and car loan interest 
     for cars made in the U.S.
       $4,000 tax deduction for seniors.
       Increases the child tax credit to $2,500 per American 
     family through 2028.
       Making tax dollars work for the American people
       Strengthens Medicaid by preventing illegal aliens and folks 
     who can, but refuse to, work from unlawfully collecting 
     benefits.
       Roots out waste, fraud, and abuse from Medicaid by removing 
     deceased individuals from the program.
       Reverses the Biden-era mandate that allowed Medicaid to 
     cover ``gender transition procedures for minors.
       Reversing green energy radicalism
       Eliminates hundreds of billions of dollars in Green New 
     Deal tax credits.
       Repeals the Biden administrations electric vehicle 
     mandates.
       Drives American energy independence by opening federal 
     lands and waters to oil, gas, coal, geothermal, and mineral 
     leasing.
       Streamlines onerous permitting processes so America can 
     build again.
       Refills the Strategic Petroleum Reserve, reducing our 
     reliance on foreign oil and strengthening our national 
     security.
       Securing our borders
       Authorizes $46 billion to complete construction of the 
     border wall.
       Hires 10,000 new Immigration and Customs Enforcement 
     personnel, 5,000 new Customs officers, and 3,000 new Border 
     Patrol agents with the goal of deporting at least 1 million 
     illegal immigrants every year.
       Bolsters the Department of Homeland Security efforts to 
     secure our borders.
       Ensuring the U.S. military remains the strongest fighting 
     force in the world
       Ensures critical investments to rebuild our military, 
     improve quality of life for service members, bolster 
     munitions production, and modernize our nuclear arsenal.
       Launches President Trumps Golden Dome initiative to ensure 
     the homeland is protected from modern and advanced threats.
       This bill will restore American greatness and improve the 
     lives of Americans nationwide--from the mountains of Western 
     North Caro]ina to the coastlines of California.
       The American people are ready for our Golden Age. Now, its 
     time for the Senate to act.
       With my warmest regards,
                                                    Chuck Edwards,
     Member of Congress.
Title IV of Senate Resolution 4, agreed to by the Senate of February 
4, 1977, calls for establishment of a system for a computerized 
schedule of all meetings and hearings of Senate committees, 
subcommittees, joint committees, and committees of conference. This 
title requires all such committees to notify the Office of the Senate 
Daily Digest--designated by the Rules Committee--of the time, place and 
purpose of the meetings, when scheduled and any cancellations or 
changes in the meetings as they occur.
  As an additional procedure along with the computerization of this 
information, the Office of the Senate Daily Digest will prepare this 
information for printing in the Extensions of Remarks section of the 
Congressional Record on Monday and Wednesday of each week.
  Meetings scheduled for Tuesday, June 24, 2025 may be found in the 
Daily Digest of todays Record.

                                JUNE 25
     10 a.m.
       Committee on Appropriations
       Subcommittee on Commerce, Justice, Science, and Related 
           Agencies
         To hold hearings to examine proposed budget estimates for 
           fiscal year 2026 for the Department of Justice.
                                                            SD-138
       Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs
         To hold hearings to examine the Semiannual Monetary 
           Policy Report to the Congress.
                                                            SD-538
       Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation
         Business meeting to consider S. 233, to amend the Office 
           of National Drug Control Policy Reauthorization Act of 
           2006 to modify the authority of the Office of National 
           Drug Control Policy with respect to the World Anti-
           Doping Agency, S. 254, to amend the Marine Mammal 
           Protection Act of 1972 to protect the cultural 
           practices and livelihoods of producers of Alaska Native 
           handicrafts and marine mammal ivory products, S. 434, 
           to establish the Commercial Space Activity Advisory 
           Committee, S. 836, to amend the Childrens Online 
           Privacy Protection Act of 1998 to strengthen 
           protections relating to the online collection, use, and 
           disclosure of personal information of children and 
           teens, S. 1872, to direct the Secretary of Commerce to 
           conduct a study on the feasibility of manufacturing in 
           the United States products for critical infrastructure 
           sectors, and the nominations of Bryan Bedford, of 
           Indiana, to be Administrator of the Federal Aviation 
           Administration, and routine lists in the Coast Guard.
                                                            SR-253
       Committee on Environment and Public Works
         To hold hearings to examine the nomination of Usha-Maria 
           Turner, of Oklahoma, to be an Assistant Administrator 
           of the Environmental Protection Agency, and David 
           Wright, of South Carolina, to be a Member of the 
           Nuclear Regulatory Commission for the term of five 
           years expiring June 30, 2030.
                                                            SD-562
       Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions
         To hold hearings to examine the nomination of Susan 
           Monarez, of Wisconsin, to be Director of the Centers 
           for Disease Control and Prevention, Department of 
           Health and Human Services.
                                                            SD-430
     10:15 a.m.
       Committee on the Judiciary
         To hold hearings to examine certain pending nominations.
                                                            SH-216
     2 p.m.
       Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe
         To receive a briefing on advancing the Armenia-Azerbaijan 
           peace deal.
                                                         2212-RHOB
     2:30 p.m.
       Committee on Appropriations
         To hold hearings to examine the Presidents special 
           message of June 3, 2025.
                                                            SD-106
       Committee on Armed Services
       Subcommittee on Readiness and Management Support
         To hold hearings to examine matters within the 
           jurisdiction of the Assistant Secretaries for Energy, 
           Installation, and Environment in support of the Fiscal 
           Year 2026 National Defense Authorization Act.
                                                           SR-232A
       Committee on the Judiciary
       Subcommittee on Federal Courts, Oversight, Agency Action, 
           and Federal Rights
         To hold hearings to examine China and lawfare against 
           American energy dominance.
                                                            SD-226
     3 p.m.
       Select Committee on Intelligence
         To hold hearings to examine the nominations of John 
           Dever, of Illinois, to be General Counsel, and George 
           Wesley Street, of Virginia, to be Director of the 
           National Counterintelligence and Security Center, both 
           of the Office of the Director of National Intelligence, 
           and Matthew Kozma, of Virginia, to be Under Secretary 
           of Homeland Security for Intelligence and Analysis.
                                                            SH-216
     3:30 p.m.
       Special Committee on Aging
         To hold hearings to examine how sports medicine can 
           improve health outcomes for seniors.
                                                            SD-G50
     4 p.m.
       Committee on Veterans Affairs
         To hold hearings to examine correcting mismanagement of 
           the veterans crisis line.
                                                            SR-418

                                JUNE 26
     9:30 a.m.
       Committee on Armed Services
         To hold hearings to examine the nominations of Hung Cao, 
           of Virginia, to be Under Secretary of the Navy, Michael 
           Dodd, of Indiana, to be an Assistant Secretary, Jules 
           Hurst III, of Virginia, Brent Ingraham, of Virginia, 
           and William Gillis, of Virginia, each to be an 
           Assistant Secretary of the Army, all of the Department 
           of Defense.
                                                            SD-G50
       Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions
         Business meeting to consider the nominations of Penny 
           Schwinn, of Tennessee, to be Deputy Secretary, and 
           Kimberly Richey, of Texas, to be Assistant Secretary 
           for Civil Rights, both of the Department of Education, 
           and Daniel Aronowitz, of Virginia, and David Keeling, 
           of Kentucky, both to be an Assistant Secretary, 
           Jonathan Berry, of Maryland, to be Solicitor, Andrew 
           Rogers, of Virginia, to be Administrator of the Wage 
           and Hour Division, Anthony DEsposito, of New York, to 
           be Inspector General, Andrea Lucas, of Virginia, to be 
           a Member of the Equal Employment Opportunity 
           Commission, Jeremiah Workman, of Ohio, to be Assistant 
           Secretary for Veterans Employment and Training, all of 
           the Department of Labor, and other pending business.
                                                            SD-430
     10:15 a.m.
       Committee on the Judiciary
         Business meeting to consider the nominations of Whitney 
           D. Hermandorfer, of Tennessee, to be United States 
           Circuit Judge for the Sixth Circuit, Zachary M. 
           Bluestone, Maria A. Lanahan, and Cristian M. Stevens, 
           each to be a United States District Judge for the 
           Eastern District of Missouri, Joshua M. Divine, to be 
           United States District Judge for the Eastern and 
           Western Districts of Missouri, Bart McKay Davis, to be 
           United States Attorney for the District of Idaho for 
           the term of four years, David Metcalf, to be United 
           States Attorney for the Eastern District of 
           Pennsylvania for the term of four years, and Kurt Wall, 
           to be United States Attorney for the Middle District of 
           Louisiana for the term of four years.
                                                            SH-216
     10:30 a.m.
       Committee on Appropriations
       Subcommittee on Department of Defense
         To hold hearings to examine proposed budget estimates for 
           fiscal year 2026 for the Air Force and Space Force.
                                                            SD-192
     11 a.m.
       Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe
         To hold hearings to examine the cost of a bad deal in 
           Ukraine.
                                                            SR-222
     3 p.m.
       Select Committee on Intelligence
         To hold closed hearings to examine certain intelligence 
           matters.
                                                            SH-219

                                JUNE 25
     2:30 p.m.
       Committee on Indian Affairs
         To hold hearings to examine the nomination of William 
           Kirkland, of Georgia, to be an Assistant Secretary of 
           the Interior.
                                                            SD-628