I wish to honor Battle Creek, Nebraska as 
they celebrate their

150th birthday. One hundred fifty years ago in August 1873, Battle 
Creek was founded. Sitting along the Elkorn River Valley in Madison 
County, Battle Creek has grown through the years, welcoming new 
families, businesses, and visitors.
  With a population of a few more than 1,000 people, they exhibit the 
best of what small town Nebraska has to offer: A great quality of life, 
family-owned businesses, and great recreation. Theyre one of the first 
stops on the Cowboy Trail. And Battle Creek is proud of its community 
members--both new and old. One outstanding example is Rose ONeill, the 
cartoonist who imagined the Kewpie Doll, which has gained fame around 
the world. As Battle Creek reaches this sesquicentennial birthday, 
there is much to celebrate.

  On September 8, 2023, page E816, in the first column, the 
following appeared: life, family-owned businesses, and great 
recreation. Theyre 1 of the first stops on the Cowboy Trail. And 
Battle Creek is proud of its
  
  The online version has been corrected to read: life, family-
owned businesses, and great recreation. Theyre one of the first 
stops on the Cowboy Trail. And Battle Creek is proud of its

  On behalf of the people of Nebraskas First Congressional District, 
congratulations on 150 years.
I rise today to celebrate the city of 
Chowchillas Centennial Celebration being held on September 23rd.
  Since its incorporation 100 years ago on February 7, 1923, Chowchilla 
has distinguished itself as a vibrant agricultural city, idyllically 
nestled between the cities of Fresno and Merced, with close access to 
the Sierra Nevada Mountains, the Pacific Coastline, and Yosemite 
National Park.
  Chowchilla hosts a rich culture that traces its roots back to the 
Chowchilla tribe who inhabited the area; the name `Chowchilla being a 
byword for bravery to the southernmost end of the Yokuts territory in 
the southern end of the San Joaquin Valley.
  At the heart of its celebratory traditions is the Western Stampede 
Cattle Drive which arrives in Chowchilla every year with great fanfare 
and excitement, showcasing the citys rich history. And Downtown 
Chowchilla displays the citys historical buildings and storefronts.
  While home to only about 19,000 people, its the birthplace of Ronald 
D. Moore, best known for his work on Star Trek, and Cameron Worrell, 
former NFL player of the Chicago Bears.
  Chowchilla is now a part of a unique collective history--along with 
other small communities such as Kerman and Patterson--that emerged from 
the foresight of a real estate promoter O.A. Robertson who envisioned 
the productive and agricultural significance of the area to 
Californias Central Valley.

  On September 8, 2023, page E818, in the second column, the 
following appeared: emerged from the foresight of a real estate 
promoter ). A. Robertson who envisioned the
  
  The online version has been corrected to read: emerged from the 
foresight of a real estate promoter O. A. Robertson who envisioned 
the

  On behalf of the people of Californias 13th Congressional District, 
I congratulate Chowchilla on 100 years of community-building that 
contributes so greatly to the Central Valley, and the state of 
California.
CELEBRATING EL SEGUNDOS LITTLE LEAGUE BASEBALL WORLD SERIES 
                             of california
I rise to celebrate the El Segundo Little 
League All-Stars, a baseball team from the City of El Segundo, who won 
the 2023 Little League Baseball World Series on the 27th of August. El 
Segundo defeated the Pabao Little League of Willemstad, Curacao in 
Williamsport, Pennsylvania.
  This years championship win is the first for a team from Los Angeles 
County since 1993 and is the first for a team from the City of El 
Segundo.
  The El Segundo Little League All-Stars--Lennon Salazar, Finley Green, 
Quinn Boehle, Lucas Keldorf, Colby Lee, Max Baker, Brody Brooks, Declan 
McRoberts, Ollie Parks, Louis Lappe, Crew OConnor, and Jaxon Kalish--
should be proud of their accomplishment, as they have secured the 8th 
total title for the State of California, the most of any State in the 
union. The El Segundo Little League team won 5 consecutive elimination 
games to compete in the championship and took home the win in a 6-5 
game. Louis Lappe hit a legendary walk-off home run to win the game in 
the sixth inning. The team was led by Manager Danny Boehle and Coaches 
Tim Abrams and Eddie Lee.
  I am happy to know that this team had the full support of their city 
behind them, and residents gathered across the city and Southern 
California to cheer them on in a wonderful display of community. Their 
achievements are made all the more special by the hard work and the 
team effort made by every player, coach and supporter along the way.
  On behalf of Californias 36th Congressional District, I would like 
to sincerely congratulate the El Segundo Little League All-Stars team 
on winning the Little League World Series and wish them best of luck in 
their future efforts. Their performance was a sight to behold, and they 
have made us all proud. Go Gundo.
CELEBRATING HONEYWELLS 100TH ANNIVERSARY OF DOING BUSINESS IN SOUTH 
                               of indiana
it is my honor to recognize and congratulate 
Honeywell on 100 years of operations and doing business in South Bend, 
Indiana.
  For a full century now, Honeywell has been a staple in the South Bend 
community as well as a source of stability and economic opportunity for 
hardworking Hoosiers in our area.
  I often say that Hoosier manufacturing is second to none. Honeywells 
South Bend facility proves this point every single day. By 
manufacturing aircraft wheel and brake systems, Honeywell Aerospace 
helps to keep people in the skies and American aviation safe and 
constantly on the move.
  I had the pleasure of touring their South Bend facility and meeting 
members of Honeywells team last month. There, I was able to see 
firsthand the quality, professional work Honeywell employees do day in 
and day out and why Honeywell has chosen a home in South Bend for the 
past 100 years.
  Congratulations again on reaching this impressive milestone. I thank 
them for their many contributions to the city of South Bend and 
Indianas Second Congressional District. I wish them continued success 
and many more years in business and anniversaries to celebrate going 
forward.
I rise today to recognize the 100th 
anniversary of the unofficial formation of the Palos Verdes Peninsula 
community. One hundred years ago, a small real estate rally took place 
that is credited with the inception of the Palos Verdes Peninsula. 
Today, the Palos Verdes Peninsula is comprised of 4 beautiful cities. 
The first city to be incorporated on the peninsula was Palos Verdes 
Estates in 1939, followed by Rolling Hills and Rolling Hills Estates in 
1957, and most recently Rancho Palos Verdes in 1973.
  On June 17, 1923, real estate developers hosted a rally to encourage 
individuals to buy property on the peninsula. This event invited people 
to hear about the development plan for the Peninsula and led to one of 
Nations first planned communities. The original site of the rally is 
where the offices of the Palos Verdes Unified District now stands. What 
was once empty land with rolling hills and scenic views has transformed 
into a beautiful community with an amazing school district, businesses, 
and homes. Today, the Peninsula is home to roughly 80,000 residents--
all of whom are my constituents.
  The illustrious history of the Palos Verdes Peninsula was celebrated 
on June 17, 2023, with Doors Open Peninsula 2023: Celebrating 100 Years 
of History on the Palos Verdes Peninsula. Community leaders, residents, 
elected officials, and business owners worked in conjunction to honor 
the Peninsulas history. On behalf of the residents of Californias 
36th Congressional District, I would like to congratulate the Palos 
Verdes Peninsula community on their 100-year anniversary and wish the 
cities a prosperous future.
I rise today to pay tribute to a remarkable 
individual, Sidney Butler, whose legacy continues to inspire and uplift 
our community. Sidney Butler dedicated his life to advocating for 
justice, community improvement, and school safety, leaving an indelible 
mark on the citizens of our county.
He understood 
the importance of civic engagement and actively participated in the 
decisionmaking processes that shaped our community.
  One of Sidneys most noteworthy contributions was his tireless work 
on various community projects, including the extensive remodeling of 
our beloved train station. His dedication to these endeavors 
demonstrated his deep-rooted commitment to enhancing the quality of 
life for all residents.
  Despite facing the challenges posed by his epilepsy disability, Mr. 
Butler never wavered in his pursuit of a more inclusive society. He 
tirelessly advocated for the rights and well-being of individuals with 
disabilities, serving as a beacon of hope and perseverance. Remarkably, 
a vehicle, yet this never deterred him from 
reaching his destinations. He relied on his own two feet or the 
kindness of others who gave him rides, demonstrating his determination 
and resourcefulness.
  One cannot speak of Mr. Butler without mentioning his famous saying, 
which encapsulates his unwavering spirit: ``If you cannot run, then 
walk. If you cannot walk, then crawl, as long as you keep it moving. 
These words reflect his enduring commitment to progress, no matter the 
obstacles in his path.
  As we remember Sidney Butler today, let us be inspired by his 
example. Let us continue the work he started, championing justice, 
community improvement, and school safety. In honoring his memory, we 
ensure that his legacy lives on, motivating us all to ``keep it 
moving towards a better future for our county.
, this tribute is a testament to the enduring impact of 
Sidney Butlers life and work on our community. May his legacy continue 
to guide and inspire us for generations to come.
today, it is with a heavy but grateful 
heart that I rise in honor of the late Joseph ``Joe Trent Siff, who 
was a dedicated, principled political activist with more than 50 years 
of support and work for local, state, and national leaders. His 
involvement began in 1968 and lasted through his local precinct work in 
Houston and his volunteer work for Rep. Lizzie Fletcher in 2022.
  Joe was born on November 16, 1947, in Akron, Ohio, the son of Alvin 
Stanley and Iris Gene Siff. The Siff family moved from Akron to 
Houston, Texas, when Joe and his twin brother Ted were 6 months old.
  From the beginning, Joe and Ted were each others biggest supporters 
and good-natured competitors--even running against 1 another for 
president of their sixth-grade class, but losing to a third candidate.
  With an impressive list of accomplishments as a child and young 
adult, Joe was an Eagle Scout as well as a proud member of the first 
class to attend all 4 years at Memorial High. He was also a multi-year 
class officer and champion orator and debater. Joe excelled at almost 
everything he did.
  As a huge Houston Colt 45s/Astros fan, Joe worked for many years as 
a press box runner and assisted sports writers, announcers, and 
scoreboard keepers during home games. Always 1 to pay it forward, he 
helped several fellow members of the Memorial High speech and drama 
teams get summer jobs as tour guides and ushers.
  After completing his freshman year at Lafayette College, Joe finished 
college at Rice University, studying architecture. In 1968, he was part 
of the campaign team to elect John Hill as Governor of Texas.
  In 1970, Joe was elected president of the Associate Student Chapters 
of the American Institute of Architecture (AIA), where he served on the 
national board and testified before Congress. Two years later, Joe 
would return to help John Hill become the Texas Attorney General while 
also taking part in the campaign for Sissy Farenthold for Governor. He 
also served on the advance team for Sargent Shrivers Vice-Presidential 
campaign.
  Campaign work inspired Joe and eventually resulted in him becoming an 
assistant to Boston Mayor Kevin White. Before Joes health problems 
arose, he would also serve as a precinct election worker. He was a 
loyal member of the Texas Democratic Party. His advocacy, like his 
concern for others, knew no boundaries; his passion knew no limits.
  At the completion of his work for Mayor White, Joe returned to 
Houston where he started his career as a financial advisor. He quickly 
became a senior vice president at Prudential Bache Securities and then 
at Lehman Brothers.
  In the early 1980s, Joe married Bonnie Hickerson. This marriage was 
blessed with the births of Iris Trent Siff and then Jordan Benjamin 
Siff.
  Joes personality was infectious. He maintained relationships, 
fostered friendships, and often tried to help friends achieve their 
goals. It was a natural transition in the 1990s when he created his 
firm, Access Strategies, to connect people and their ideas to the 
capital and other resources they needed. This talent, matched with his 
wide-ranging network, resulted in projects involving real estate, art, 
book and live performance productions, and so much more. His multi-
decade representation of artist David Adickes is I example of his many 
skills.
  A great storyteller with an unceasing curiosity about the world 
around him, Joe loved his family, conversations, politics, architecture 
and design, and travel. He was a kind and supportive father, brother, 
and friend, including mine for many decades.
  On Tuesday, July 11, 2023, our world lost a bright soul, who was 
committed to making it a better place for everyone. Joe was 75 years 
old, and is survived by his 2 children, Iris and Jordan, and their 
mother, Bonnie; his twin brother Ted Siff (Janelle Buchanan) of Austin, 
Texas, as well as nieces and numerous cousins.
, once again, I am pleased to honor the life and legacy of 
Joe Siff, and I am grateful to share his story with the rest of our 
Nation. I cherish our memories while admiring his significant, personal 
contributions.
  He worked tirelessly to make our state and the world a better place. 
May he Rest in Peace.
I rise today to honor the extraordinary life 
and legacy of an educator, administrator, and all-around phenomenal 
woman, Ina Yvonne Whisenhunt Tillman, who passed away on August 8, 
2023, at the age of 85.
  Ina was born in Vredenburgh, Alabama, to the late Martha Packer 
Whisenhunt and Walter Carver Whisenhunt, Sr. Upon graduating high 
school, Ina followed her passion for education at Alabama State 
University where she earned her Bachelor of Science in Education in 
1960. Returning home from Montgomery as a teacher, Ina spent the next 
decade teaching in the Selma City School System.
  As a college student, Ina was inspired to get involved in the fight 
for civil rights by influential activists like Thelma M. Glass and 
Attorney E.D. Nixon, who served as her professors and frequent 
speakers. When she returned to Selma, she continued to stay involved in 
the Movement, participating in numerous marches and demonstrations. She 
was a proud member of the Brown Chapel A.M.E. Church, where she heard 
. speak, solidifying her commitment to 
fighting for liberty, equality, and justice for all, especially the 
African-American community. Bringing her activism to her classroom, Ina 
bravely

took on the task as 1 of the first Black teachers to integrate Cedar 
Park Elementary School.
  In 1971, Ina left home again, relocating to Mobile, AL, to advance 
her career in academia. She served as the Educational Director of Head 
Start in Pascagoula, MS, before transitioning into the Mobile County 
School System as a Title-IV Assistant Director and Chapter I Assistant 
Director. Ina made her mark as a dynamic educator and always worked to 
improve the lives of her students both inside and outside the 
classroom. Aspiring to become a principal, Ina continued her education 
at the University of South Alabama, earning her masters degree in 1974 
and then at the University of Alabama for her associates degree 2 
years later.
  Following a battle between local Black educators and the school 
system, where a judge ruled in favor of the educators regarding 
discriminatory hiring practices, Ina accomplished her goal, becoming 
the Assistant Principal of Mattie T. Blount High School. She later 
served as Principal of E.T. Belsaw/Mt. Vernon School until her 
retirement in 1995.
  Throughout her life, Ina was an active member of her community, no 
matter where she relocated. She was a proud member of Delta Sigma Theta 
Sorority, Incorporated; The Links, Incorporated; and Phi Delta Kappa.
  She also received many awards and recognitions, including the 
Outstanding Educational Service Award from Blount High School; the 
Outstanding Educator Award from Phi Delta Kappa; the Top Career Woman 
of the Year in 1988; and the Area Directors Award from The Links, Inc.
  Later in life, Ina expanded her community impact through the written 
word. She authored books and papers, even writing one on her life 
growing up in Selma, titled ``Just Live, a complication of short 
stories. Inas penmanship led her to contribute to the Mobile Press-
Register and win first place in the 1992 National Convention of Delta 
Sigma Theta Sorority, Inc. for her position paper.
  Inas is preceded in death by her parents and her brothers, Willie 
James Whisenhunt and Walter Carver Whisenhunt, Jr. She is survived by 
her daughter, Felicia (Marvin); son, Joseph (Renunda); 6 grandchildren, 
Jeremy Populus Jones, Ari Clayton-Brinkley (Calvin), Kobi Jones, Mikah 
Jones, Charles Clayton, Chloe Jones; sister-in-law, Patricia 
Whisenhunt; 2 nephews, Bradley Whisenhunt and Corey Whisenhunt; 4 
nieces, Angela Whisenhunt, Cheryl Whisenhunt Young (Kimmer), Denise 
Whisenhunt Carey (Rodney), and Erica Whisenhunt; 2 cousins, Mary Powell 
and Jacquitta Powell Green; 1 stepdaughter, Gracie M. Anderson 
(Brosofski); and a host of other family and friends.
  On a personal note, my twin brothers and I affectionately called her 
``TVonne. Our families were close forever friends. Growing up in 
Selma, I have so many fond memories of the good times we enjoyed with 
her children. Her daughter ``Lisa and son ``Jojo were our childhood 
best friends. When those boys got together it was triple trouble. Even 
when they moved to Mobile, we continued to stay connected. Over the 
years, we have celebrated family triumphs and comforted each other 
during times of sorrow and pain. TVonne was like a second mother to 
me--always providing wise counsel and words of encouragement. She will 
be missed, but I know that her incredible legacy will live on in the 
many people she impacted.
  On behalf of Alabamas 7th Congressional District, I ask my 
colleagues to join me in celebrating the extraordinary life and legacy 
of Ina Yvonne Whisenhunt Tillman for her contributions to generations 
of scholars and decades of exemplary service as an educator and 
community activist.
I rise today to recognize our Texas-24 
Hometown Hero of the week, Keller High School student, Maximus 
Williamson. At 14 years old, Maximus set a new National Age Group 
record for the boys 13-14 age group at the 2021 Texas Age Group 
Swimming Championships, becoming the fastest American male in the 
events history for his age range.

  He has continued to excel, recently breaking more records, and taking 
home the gold in the 200 meters individual medley course at the World 
Junior Championships. As if Maximus taking home gold wasnt impressive 
enough, his performance at the championships is matched by only 1 other 
American teenager, a man who went on to win 4 consecutive Olympic gold 
medals in the race. His time compares to what the great Michael Phelps 
accomplished at that age.
  I congratulate Maximus on his win and thank him for representing 
North Texas well. I wish him all the best in his future competitions 
and will be rooting for him.
I rise today to recognize and congratulate 
both Allan and Kim Overhiser for their incredible service to Allegan 
County and on their induction to the prestigious Michigan Farmers Hall 
of Fame. It is an honor to express my gratitude for their dedication 
and commitment to our community and Southwest Michigan.
When his father 
retired, Allan and Kim Overhiser took over the business and became the 
fifth generation of family farmers. Under their combined leadership, 
the farm has expanded to 325 acres and includes more than 30,000 fruit 
trees. Allan and Kim have brought on their son, Alex, to continue 
managing the familys farming operations.
  Coinciding with his agricultural and business leadership, Allan has 
also diligently served his community. Allan spent 16 years as the Casco 
Township Clerk from 1988 to 2004 and has continued his service as the 
Township Supervisor since he was first elected in 2004. On Allans 
watch, his constituents have directly benefitted from the development 
of a 20-acre park overlooking Lake Michigan, the creation of the South 
Haven Area Water and Sewer Authority, and the establishment of the 
South Haven Area Emergency Services Authority. He is a recipient of the 
Michigan Horticultural Society Distinguished Service Award.
  In addition to helping run their family farm, Kim Overhiser has also 
distinguished herself as a community leader. She is a founding member 
of the Michigan Agritourism Association, a board member for the 
Lakeshore Harvest Country Association, a Cub Scout leader, and as a 
strong supporter of Fennville High School Athletics and Bands. Kims 
passion for service has helped make Southwest Michigan an even better 
place to live, work, and raise a family.
, I thank the House for joining me to congratulate Allan 
and Kim Overhiser on their well-deserved Hall of Fame induction and for 
their years of dedicated service to Allegan County and Michigans 4th 
Congressional District.
today, I want to recognize Assistant Fire 
Chief and Melvindale City Council Member Steve Densmore for his 27 
years of service with the Dearborn Fire Department in Michigans 12th 
District Strong.
  Assistant Fire Chief Densmore got his start in public service in 
1996. After only 1 year of service, he received the first of many 
Meritorious Company Commendations. In addition, he has been recognized 
numerous times for valor and lifesaving. Over the course of his public 
service career, Assistant Chief Densmore has committed himself to 
continuous professional development, completing numerous certification 
programs in various rescue operations techniques and other technical 
programming.
  Assistant Chief Densmore has been an outstanding public servant to 
the communities served by the Dearborn Fire Department. Please join me 
in recognizing his 27 years of commitment to protecting our families 
safety across Michigans 12th District Strong as we wish him well in 
his retirement.
I rise today to thank the 
Savannah Fire Department for its unwavering service towards our 
community. Throughout my time in government at the local, state, and 
federal levels, I have always known them to be a reliable force for 
good in the Savannah area. For example, in early March the Savannah 
Fire Department saved the life of a young girl at a swim meet.
  An 11-year old girl was swimming at the Chatham County Aquatic Center 
when she began to drown. Savannah Fire responded to the call and found 
the young girl unable to breathe and in cardiac arrest. The 
Firefighters quickly began CPR, and they continued until she regained 
breathing and a pulse. Thanks to the quick actions of Savannah Fire, 
she is still with us today.
  I would like to personally thank Advanced Firefighter Phil Haag, 
Captain Brian Smith, and Advanced Firefighter Mario Smith for their 
actions in saving this young girl. This is just one of the many ways 
they keep our community safe every single day.
this year, the entire state of Utah 
celebrates a remarkable milestone in our communitys history--the 75th 
anniversary of Salt Lake Community College. As Utahs largest college 
with more than 45,000 students across 10 campuses, SLCC has played a 
pivotal role in shaping the lives of countless individuals and has been 
a cornerstone of education and progress in the Beehive State.
  Over the past seven and a half decades, Salt Lake Community College 
has been a beacon of opportunity, offering a pathway to success for 
students from all walks of life. It has embraced the values of 
collaboration, community, inclusivity, learning, innovation, integrity, 
and trust, providing a welcoming environment for students of varying 
backgrounds and aspirations.
  As we commemorate this milestone, we must recognize the dedication 
and hard work of the faculty, staff, and administrators who have 
tirelessly supported and guided our students throughout their 
educational journeys. The impact of their commitment extends far beyond 
the walls of the classroom, touching the hearts and minds of our 
community members.
  The successes achieved by Salt Lake Community College alumni are a 
testament to the institutions commitment to excellence. Graduates have 
gone on to become leaders, innovators, and contributors to our society 
in various fields. Their accomplishments reflect the quality of 
education and opportunities provided here.
  I would also like to acknowledge the role of the community in 
nurturing and sustaining this institution. Salt Lake Community College 
has thrived because of the unwavering support of the people it serves. 
Your investment in education has paid dividends in the form of a more 
skilled and empowered workforce, contributing to the prosperity of our 
region.
  As we look ahead to the future, let us continue to support Salt Lake 
Community Colleges mission of empowering individuals through 
education. Let us rededicate ourselves to the values of learning, 
growth, and community that have defined this institution for 75 years.
  Together, we can ensure that SLCC remains a beacon of hope and 
opportunity for generations to come.
  Congratulations to Salt Lake Community College on this momentous 
occasion and may the next 75 years be even more fruitful and inspiring. 
I thank them for their dedication to our community and its future.
I offer my congratulations 
to the Republican Study Committees Senior Policy Counsel, Omar Hossino 
and his wife Leen, on the birth of their first child, a boy.
  Hatem Hossino, named after his paternal grandfather, was born at 8:29 
p.m. on Saturday, July 29, 2023, in Arlington, VA. The name `Hatem is 
Arabic for ``decisive, ``determined, and ``judge. The Hossino 
family traces its lineage to Syria, through the village of Salamiyeh.
  As Chairman of the RSCs National Security Task Force, I have long 
valued Omars strategic advice. He has been instrumental in moving 
forward important policy legislation through the House and continues to 
be integral to the Committees congressional staff as it advances 
policies on behalf of the American people.
  Best wishes to Omar, Leen, and all their families on the newest 
addition to the Hossino family.