I rise today to recognize Bruce Parsons on 
the occasion of his retirement as Principal of Plymouth Regional High 
School.
  Bruce first came to New Hampshire as the principal of Wentworth 
Elementary School in 1991. Soon after, Bruce transferred to Plymouth 
Regional High School as Assistant Principal and was promoted to 
Principal in 1993. He has held that position ever since--more than 30 
years. Among his many accomplishments, Bruces colleagues have called 
him an effective leader, creative problem solver, and passionate 
educator. I commend Bruce on his retirement after three decades with 
Plymouth Regional High School and his unwavering dedication to our 
states students.
  On behalf of my constituents in New Hampshires Second Congressional 
District, I thank Bruce for his years of service to our community and 
for being a part of what makes the Granite State such a wonderful place 
to live, work, and raise a family. I am honored to recognize and 
congratulate Bruce on his retirement and wish him the best of luck in 
the years ahead.
I rise today to recognize and congratulate 
my friend Charles Hursey of Hurseys Bar-B-Q on being inducted into the 
inaugural class of the North Carolina Bar-B-Q Hall of Fame.
  With all the divisiveness and partisanship impacting our nation 
today, it is refreshing to see the new North Carolina Bar-B-Q Hall of 
Fame bringing together all sides of the great divide--Eastern and 
Lexington style barbeque.
  Very few things exemplify North Carolina more than barbeque, and last 
month the North Carolina Bar-B-Q Hall of Fame inducted its first class. 
I was thrilled that Charles Hursey, owner of the legendary Hurseys 
Bar-B-Q, is part of this esteemed class. As a frequent patron of 
Hurseys Bar-B-Q, I can personally attest to the quality of the food 
and friendliness of the employees of this great North Carolina 
institution.
  Hurseys Bar-B-Q was founded by Sylvester and Daisy Hursey, Charles 
parents. In fact, Hurseys Bar-B-Q was one of the first barbecue 
wholesalers to ever be licensed by the state of North Carolina back in 
1949. As he grew, Charles began learning the business and, in 1966, 
took over the familys Burlington location. Eventually, Charles would 
go on to run the whole operation. Charles maintains this role today 
and, following the Hursey family tradition, continues to operate four 
restaurant locations and a catering facility alongside his wife, 
children, and grandchildren.
  In North Carolina, barbeque is one of our most cherished and almost 
sacred traditions. It is a labor-intensive art that requires great 
skill and hard work on the part of the pitmaster. At the same time, it 
is an art that stresses the importance of family and passing down 
practices and recipes from one generation to the next. I cannot think 
of anybody who embodies these attributes better than Charles.
, please join me today in recognizing Charles Hursey on 
being named to the

North Carolina Bar-B-Q Hall of Fame. Lets Eat.
I rise today to recognize Reverend John I. 
Jenkins, C.S.C. of Notre Dame, Indiana and present him with the 
Congressional Patriot Award. Fr. Jenkins serves as the 17th President 
of the University of Notre Dame, and he has dedicated himself to 
faithfully serving and leading our community. He will step down as 
president in June 2024.
  Since 1990, Fr. Jenkins has been a member of Notre Dames Department 
of Philosophy, specializing in theology. He is a distinguished graduate 
of Notre Dame and holds a Doctor of Philosophy from Oxford University. 
Additionally, Fr. Jenkins graduated from the Jesuit School of Theology 
with a Master of Divinity and a Licentiate in Sacred Theology.
  In 2005, Notre Dames Board of Trustees elected Fr. Jenkins to serve 
as President. Under his leadership, the university has made monumental 
advances in academia and strengthened its important connection to 
faith. Additionally, Notre Dame has committed to ensuring its students 
can receive the financial aid they need to stay in school and be 
successful. Through Fr. Jenkins hard work and effort, Notre Dame has 
transformed into one of the fastest growing research universities 
nationwide. It was invited to join the prestigious Association of 
American Universities in 2023, becoming the only religiously affiliated 
university in the United States to receive this honor.
  Fr. Jenkins is a longtime member of the Board of Directors of the 
Commission on Presidential Debates, which has commended his leadership 
on the topic of civil discourse. He has advocated for common ground and 
understanding with individuals across the aisle, particularly when it 
comes to our faith and views. I am proud to recognize Fr. Jenkins today 
for his excellence and the impact he has made on countless lives.
  It is an honor to bestow Fr. Jenkins with the Patriot Award for his 
exceptional service to our Nation. I am certain this will not be the 
end of his accomplishments, and I wish him the best of luck in his 
future endeavors.
I rise today to pay tribute to 
one of my trusted advisors and friends, Mike Duncan, who paved a path 
with business and political expertise from rural Martin County, 
Kentucky, all the way to the White House.
  Over the last five decades, Mike has served as a remarkable political 
strategist, dressed sharply in the armor of wisdom, confidence, and 
patriotism, commanding the respect of our peers at the highest ranks of 
the Republican Party. He has served on six Presidential campaigns, 
served as Chairman and General Counsel of the RNC, and was elected as a 
Kentucky delegate to eleven Republican National Conventions. There is 
no place for timidity or fear when preserving the foundation of our 
conservative values, and I applaud Mikes staunch advocacy of the GOP 
year after year.
  In fact, his stalwart leadership has been commissioned by a multitude 
of organizations and the Nations foremost leaders, including President 
George H.W. Bush, President George W. Bush, and President Donald J. 
Trump. He served as Chairman of the U.S. Postal Service Board of 
Governors and was appointed by President George W. Bush to the 
Tennessee Valley Authority. There is no higher honor in the United 
States than serving our Commander-in-Chief, yet he also dedicated time 
to mentor rising leaders at Alice Lloyd College, and serve on the 
boards of nonprofit organizations, like the Christian Appalachian 
Project and The Center for Rural Development.
  When I embarked on a mission to establish The Center for Rural 
Development (The Center) for Southern and Eastern Kentucky in 1996, I 
invited Mike to serve on the Board of Directors, harnessing his 
financial expertise, his visionary mind, and his passion to raise up 
the next generation of leaders. He conceptualized the youth programs at 
The Center, including my namesake Rogers Scholars Program to provide 
opportunities for our rising students in the mountains to earn college 
scholarship awards, learn leadership skills, expand their horizons, and 
interact with local and regional business owners, leaders, and 
educators. Since inception, more than 1,300 students have graduated 
from the Rogers Scholars program, earning more than $11 million in 
scholarships from 19 participating colleges and universities.
  Mikes legacy is the epitome of what we need to replicate among our 
future generations: sons and daughters of Eastern Kentucky who choose 
to use their talents and energy to make our region, our state, and our 
great Nation a better place to live.
it is my honor today to 
recognize Richard A. Duerr, Sr., a Naval veteran and firefighter, for 
his many years of service to our community.
  Richard began his career in the United States Navy, serving our 
country as a Communications Yeoman 2nd Class from 1965 to 1969. 
Following his military service, Richard embarked on careers in the 
private sector, working for more than 16 years at Revere Copper and 
Brass in Rome, NY, and also at Sanford Fire Equipment and Turning Stone 
Resort Casino.
  Beyond his professional endeavors, Richard has engaged in many years 
of service to his community. For 51 years, he has been an integral 
member of the Camden Volunteer Fire Department, holding vital roles 
such as Assistant Chief and Fire Police Captain, a position

he held for 26 years. Richard is a Life Member of the Volunteer Fire 
Police Association of the State of New York (VFPASNY), currently 
serving as president. He was also Chairman of the Seminar Committee for 
15 years, Editor of the VFPASNY Newspaper and a trainer in multiple 
counties for the Fire Police Review Class for 12 years.
  Richard is a Life Member of the Oneida County Volunteer Fire Police 
Association where he served as President for 12 years and has held 
various other positions including the role of Chaplain. Additionally, 
Richard contributed to the work of the New York State Chaplains 
Association, conducting memorial and funeral services, and to the 
Oneida County Volunteer Firefighters Association, where Richard is 
currently the Chaplain and Sergeant at Arms.
  In addition to these many accomplishments, Richard has been a member 
of the American Legion Post 66 in Camden, New York for 26 years, and is 
a member of the Firefighters Association of the State of New York 
(FASNY).
  Richard has received various awards including the George Woodman 
Award for Excellence, seven Presidents Awards for Community and Fire 
Police Leadership, and the VFPASNY Fire Police Officer of the Year. 
These, along with several other certificates and plaques reflect 
Richards many contributions.
  On behalf of New Yorks 22nd District, I am pleased to recognize the 
service and accomplishments of Richard Duerr, Sr. I thank him for his 
dedication to our community and our country.
I rise today to recognize and congratulate 
This prestigious 
accolade is a testament to Mr. Grays exemplary leadership, dedication, 
and contributions to the aviation industry.
  During his tenure as the airport manager of Denton Enterprise Airport 
from 2017 to 2023, Mr. Gray demonstrated exceptional proficiency in 
managing the day-to-day operations, planning, and development of one of 
Texas busiest airports. Under his guidance, Denton Enterprise Airport 
grew significantly, rising from 7th busiest airport in Texas as he 
arrived, to become the 5th busiest airport in Texas and among the top 
60 nationwide, with over 212,000 operations in 2023.
He oversaw 
significant milestones, including the delivery of the airports second 
runway in 2019 and the expansion of the main runway in 2021. These 
achievements not only enhanced the airports operational capacity, but 
also contributed to its standing as a vital regional transportation hub 
and ensured its place as an economic generator into the future.
  Furthermore, Mr. Grays leadership extended beyond Denton Enterprise 
Airport. As the President of the Texas Airports Council, he tirelessly 
advocated for the betterment and benefit of general aviation airports 
across Texas. His commitment to advancing the interests of the aviation 
community has left a lasting impact and has been widely recognized and 
appreciated.
  Despite his departure from Denton and return to Arizona as the 
Aviation Director at the Buckeye Municipal Airport, Mr. Gray has 
remained an invaluable resource and mentor to others in the aviation 
profession. His willingness to share his extensive knowledge and 
expertise reflects his genuine passion for the industry and his 
dedication to supporting his colleagues.
a top-notch general aviation airport manager. His 
remarkable achievements and unwavering commitment to excellence make 
him truly deserving of the Airport Professional of the Year Award. I am 
honored to commend Mr. Gray for his outstanding contributions to the 
aviation community and extend my warmest congratulations on this well-
deserved recognition.
I rise today to recognize Community 
Transformation Church on its centennial, which fell on April 14, 2024. 
Community Transformation Church is based in Houston, Texas, and has 
eight satellite campuses located across Texas and Arkansas.
  The Community Transformation Church that exists today started with 
two different churches: Magnolia Park Assembly of God and Oaklawn 
Assembly of God. Magnolia Park Assembly of God was founded around 1924 
by Rev. Jimmy McClellan. Two years later, in 1926, Rev. E.M. Yeats 
became the pastor and served until his retirement in 1976.
  In addition to Magnolia Park, Rev. McClellan also organized the 
Oaklawn Assembly of God. During the years leading up to the 1976 
merger, Revs. Worth Williams, Hardie Weathers, Cleddy Keith, and O.C. 
Bates all served as church pastors of Oaklawn.
  After the two churches came together, they took on the name Christian 
Temple Assembly of God and met at the old Magnolia Park location. 
Thanks to the significant growth, a 10-acre plot was eventually 
purchased on Almeda Genoa Road, and the church began a million-dollar 
building campaign for a new sanctuary that opened on Easter Sunday 
1983. Rev. Bates was the first pastor of Christian Temple, where he 
served for 25 years.
  In June 2023, the church once again took on a new name: the Community 
Transformation Church. Pastors Don and Susan Nordin have led the church 
since November 4, 2001. Throughout the last 23 years, Community 
Transformation Church has started five campuses that were gifted away, 
given millions of dollars to mission efforts across the world, and much 
more to show the love of Christ across the region they serve. Community 
Transformation Church has also started eight residential drug and 
alcohol treatment centers and created a 38-acre ranch for rescued girls 
who have been trafficked.
  Over the past century, it is evident the Lord has used this historic 
church to demonstrate the love, kindness, and generosity of Jesus 
Christ in the surrounding community and worldwide. May God continue to 
bless Community Transformation Church and its members for many years to 
come.
had I been present, I would have voted NAY 
on Roll Call No. 119, H.R. 7888; YEA on Roll Call No. 114, Biggs 
Amendment No. 1 to H.R. 7888; and YEA on Roll Call No. 115, Roy 
Amendment No. 2 to H.R. 7888.
I rise today with my colleagues 
Representative Fulcher and Senators Mike Crapo and Jim Risch to 
recognize the retirement of Lieutenant General Erik Peterson for his 38 
years of exemplary service to our nation.
  Lieutenant General Erik Petersons journey began in Idaho, where he 
received his education from elementary school to university, ultimately 
graduating from the University of Idahos College of Mines and Earth 
Resources in 1986. Upon graduation he received his Army commission as a 
Distinguished Military Graduate of the University of Idahos Chrisman 
Battalion.
  Nonetheless, his educational career did not end there. He earned 
Masters Degrees in Business Administration and National Security 
Strategy. In addition, as part of his professional military education, 
he completed the Aviation Officer Advanced Course, and attended the 
Combined Arms Service Staff School, Command and General Staff College, 
and the National War College.
  Throughout his career Lieutenant General Erik Peterson held key 
command and leadership roles, including four tours with the 160th 
Special Operations Aviation Regiment. He served as the Director of the 
Flight Concepts Division at Fort Eustis, Virginia, and held roles

as Brigade Commander of the 10th Combat Aviation Brigade and Chief of 
Staff for the 10th Mountain Division at Fort Drum, New York. 
Additionally, he assumed responsibilities as Deputy Commanding General 
of U.S. Army Cadet Command in Fort Knox, Kentucky, and later as 
Commanding General at U.S. Army Special Operations Aviation Command at 
Fort Bragg, North Carolina. His tenure included service as Director of 
Army Aviation at the Pentagon and Commanding General of Division West 
of First U.S. Army at Fort Hood, Texas, which oversaw five brigades and 
two mobilization sites nationwide. Furthermore, he served as Director 
of Force Development in G-8.
  His military awards and decorations include: 4 Distinguished Service 
Medals, 4 Legions of Merit, 6 Bronze Star Medals, 5 Meritorious Service 
Medals, 5 Air Medals Valor Device, the NATO Meritorious Service Medal, 
the Combat Action Badge, the Master Aviator Badge, the Master 
Parachutist Badge, and the Air Assault Badge.
  His foreign military awards include: the Kuwait Liberation Medal from 
the Governments of Kuwait and Saudi Arabia, the Republic of Korea Order 
of National Security Merit Cheonsu Medal, the Australian Parachutist 
Badge, the Honorary Republic of Korea Master Aviator Badge, and the 
Honorary Swedish Parachutist Badge.
  In addition, he is the U.S. Committee of the Blue Shields first 
recipient of the Award for Meritorious Military Service in Protection 
of Cultural Property and was inducted into the U.S. Army Reserve 
Officer Training Corps Hall of Fame in 2016.
  Upon his retirement as Deputy Chief of Staff, G-8, after 38 years of 
service, Lieutenant General Erik Peterson leaves behind a legacy of 
honor and dedication, whereas he will retire with the distinction of 
being the highest-ranking U.S. Army Officer in the history of the state 
of Idaho.
  It is our greatest honor to recognize Lieutenant General Erik 
Peterson for the outstanding contributions hes made to the people of 
Idaho and the Nation through his distinguished military service and 
commitment to the defense of our Nation. We thank him for his service 
and wish him well in retirement.
RECOGNIZING STEVE SPRATLINS 33 YEARS OF SERVICE AT SOUTHERN UNION 
                               of alabama
I rise today to recognize Steve 
Spratlins 33 years of service on the occasion of his retirement from 
Southern Union State Community College.
1991 as Special 
Activities Coordinator, serving as an external liaison for the college. 
As a result of diligence, skill, and dedication, he advanced to the 
positions of Director of Institutional Research, Planning and 
Development in 2002 and Associate Dean of Instruction in 2009, the 
position he currently holds. Mr. Spratlin has spearheaded the SACSCOC 
reaccreditation efforts of the college for many years, and has served 
on numerous committees. His significant contributions to Southern Union 
and his dedication to serving exemplify his profound influence within 
both the college and the broader community.
, known for his 
wise counsel, sound judgement, and love and dedication to SUSCC. He has 
been instrumental in helping the college earn numerous awards for 
excellence and receive grant funds from local, state, regional, and 
national organizations. The inspiring leadership and guidance he has 
displayed throughout his tenure at the college will be dearly missed.
, please join me in recognizing Steve Spratlins tireless 
years of service to Southern Union State Community College and wishing 
him the best in his retirement.
I would like to take this opportunity to 
commemorate a milestone of profound significance--the 90th anniversary 
of St. Gregory Armenian Church in Indian Orchard, Massachusetts.
  For nearly a century, St. Gregory has stood as a beacon of faith, 
unity, and community, enriching the lives of its members and serving as 
a cherished cornerstone of Armenian heritage throughout the Greater 
Springfield community. As the crossroads of New England, Springfield is 
home to a unique diaspora of different cultures and ethnicities, 
including a strong Armenian commnunity with roots going back to the 
early 20th century.
  As a great number of Armenian populations immigrated and settled in 
the Springfield area during the early 1900s, the need for a church and 
community center was quickly realized. Since its founding in 1934, St. 
Gregory has been a pillar of hope and support throughout our region, 
giving back not only to the community in western Massachusetts, but 
also providing humanitarian assistance to Armenians throughout the 
world. Their commitment to improving the lives of others is inspiring 
and has left an indelible mark on countless individuals and families.
, it is my pleasure to congratulate the members of the St. 
Gregory Armenian Church as they mark 90 years of upholding the sacred 
traditions, values, and teachings of the Armenian Apostolic Church. As 
we reflect on the countless blessings bestowed upon St. Gregory, and 
the blessings bestowed upon the community they serve, we look to the 
future with great optimism and renewed vigor. I wish them much growth, 
spiritual enlightenment, and enduring unity for the next 90 years and 
beyond. Congratulations from the United States of America.
I rise today to congratulate Kathleen Heaphy 
on her retirement from the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA). Ms. 
Heaphy is an exemplary public servant who has demonstrated the highest 
standards of professionalism serving our Nations veterans. She worked 
in the VAs Office of General Counsel for more than 30 years.
, including on health care 
eligibility reform, the establishment of the medical benefits package, 
mental health care, care for military sexual trauma, care for women 
veterans and issues involving informed consent and medical ethics. As 
a new chapter in life, it is my hope that she 
will recall, with a deep sense of pride and accomplishment, the 
outstanding contributions she made to the VA and to our Nations 
veterans. May her retirement be filled with health and happiness.
Title IV of Senate Resolution 4, agreed to by the Senate of February 
4, 1977, calls for establishment of a system for a computerized 
schedule of all meetings and hearings of Senate committees, 
subcommittees, joint committees, and committees of conference. This 
title requires all such committees to notify the Office of the Senate 
Daily Digest--designated by the Rules Committee--of the time, place and 
purpose of the meetings, when scheduled and any cancellations or 
changes in the meetings as they occur.
  As an additional procedure along with the computerization of this 
information, the Office of the Senate Daily Digest will prepare this 
information for printing in the Extensions of Remarks section of the 
Congressional Record on Monday and Wednesday of each week.
  Meetings scheduled for Tuesday, April 16, 2024 may be found in the 
Daily Digest of todays Record.

                                APRIL 17
     9:30 a.m.
       Committee on Armed Services
         To hold hearings to examine the Department of Energy and 
           National Nuclear Security Administration atomic energy 
           defense activities in review of the Defense 
           Authorization Request for Fiscal Year 2025 and the 
           Future Years Defense Program; to be immediately 
           followed by a closed session in SVC-217.
                                                            SD-G50
       Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
         To hold hearings to examine the nominations of Colleen 
           Duffy Kiko, of North Dakota, and Anne Marie Wagner, of 
           Virginia, both to be a Member of the Federal Labor 
           Relations Authority, and David Huitema, of Maryland, to 
           be Director of the Office of Government Ethics.
                                                            SD-342
     10 a.m.
       Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation
         To hold hearings to examine the FAA Organization 
           Designation Authorization (ODA) Expert Panel Report.
                                                            SR-253
       Committee on Environment and Public Works
         To hold hearings to examine the nomination of Christopher 
           T. Hanson, of Michigan, to be a Member of the Nuclear 
           Regulatory Commission.
                                                            SD-406
       Committee on Finance
         To hold hearings to examine the Presidents 2024 trade 
           policy agenda.
                                                            SD-215
       Committee on Foreign Relations
         To hold hearings to examine modernizing United States 
           alliances and partnerships in the Indo-Pacific.
                                                            SD-419
       Committee on the Judiciary
         To hold hearings to examine pending nominations.
                                                            SD-226
     11:15 a.m.
       Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
       Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations
         To hold hearings to examine Boeings broken safety 
           culture, focusing on firsthand accounts.
                                                            SD-342
     2:30 p.m.
       Committee on Appropriations
       Subcommittee on Commerce, Justice, Science, and Related 
           Agencies
         To hold hearings to examine proposed budget estimates and 
           justification for fiscal year 2024 for the Department 
           of Justice.
                                                            SD-192
       Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions
       Subcommittee on Primary Health and Retirement Security
         To hold hearings to examine feeding a healthier America, 
           focusing on current efforts and potential opportunities 
           for Food is Medicine.
                                                            SD-430
       Select Committee on Intelligence
         To hold hearings to examine an update on foreign threats 
           to the 2024 elections.
                                                            SH-216
     3 p.m.
       Committee on Armed Services
       Subcommittee on Personnel
         To hold hearings to examine the Department of Defenses 
           efforts to ensure servicemembers access to safe, high-
           quality pharmaceuticals.
                                                            SD-G50
     3:30 p.m.
       Committee on Veterans Affairs
         To hold hearings to examine S. 1299, to amend title 38, 
           United States Code, to require the Secretary of 
           Veterans Affairs to periodically review the automatic 
           maximum coverage under Servicemembers Group Life 
           Insurance program and the Veterans Group Life 
           Insurance program, S. 1590, to amend title 38, United 
           States Code, to extend increased dependency and 
           indemnity compensation paid to surviving spouses of 
           veterans who die from amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, 
           regardless of how long the veterans had such disease 
           prior to death, S. 1910, to expand the VetSuccess on 
           Campus program of the Department of Veterans Affairs, 
           S. 2014, to ensure that certain members of the Armed 
           Forces who served in female cultural support teams 
           receive proper credit for such service, S. 2181, to 
           amend title 38, United States Code, to repeal the 
           sunset on entitlement to memorial headstones and 
           markers for commemoration of veterans and certain 
           individuals and to repeal the sunset on authority to 
           bury remains of certain spouses and children in 
           national cemeteries, S. 2276, to provide for opt-out 
           sharing of information on members retiring or 
           separating from the Armed Forces with community-based 
           organizations and related entities, S. 2718, to amend 
           title 38, United States Code, to improve matters 
           relating to medical examinations for veterans 
           disability compensation, S. 2778, to require the 
           Secretary of Veterans Affairs to submit to Congress a 
           report on competition among suppliers of the Department 
           of Veterans Affairs, S. 2863, to establish the 
           Commission on Equity and Reconciliation in the 
           Uniformed Services, S. 2873, to amend title 38, United 
           States Code, to recognize the Women-Owned Small 
           Business program in the Department of Veterans Affairs 
           procurement hierarchy of small business preferences, S. 
           2888, to amend title 10, United States Code, to 
           authorize representatives of veterans service 
           organizations to participate in presentations to 
           promote certain benefits available to veterans during 
           preseparation counseling under the Transition 
           Assistance Program of the Department of Defense, S. 
           3126, to amend title 38, United States Code, to 
           authorize the Secretary of Veterans Affairs to furnish 
           or replace a headstone, marker, or medallion for the 
           grave of an eligible Medal of Honor recipient 
           regardless of the recipients dates of service in the 
           Armed Forces, S. 3256, to amend title 38, United States 
           Code, to establish the Veterans Experience Office, S. 
           3295, to require the Secretary of Veterans Affairs to 
           establish a portal for maintaining digital records of 
           former members of the Armed Forces and to establish an 
           advisory committee regarding the maintenance of those 
           records, S. 3452, to authorize the Secretary of 
           Veterans Affairs to determine the eligibility or 
           entitlement of a member or former member of the Armed 
           Forces described in subsection (a) to a benefit under a 
           law administered by the Secretary solely based on 
           alternative sources of evidence when the military 
           service records or medical treatment records of the 
           member or former member are incomplete because of 
           damage or loss of records after being in the possession 
           of the Federal Government, S. 3567, to establish within 
           the Department of Veterans Affairs a Veterans Affairs 
           History Office, S. 3636, to require the Director of the 
           Office of Personnel Management to establish a pilot 
           program to identify and refer veterans for potential 
           employment with Federal land management agencies, S. 
           3728, to amend title 38, United States Code, to modify 
           the administration of housing loans of the Department 
           of Veterans Affairs to prevent or resolve default under 
           such loans, S. 3746, to amend title 38, United States 
           Code, to

           make certain spouses eligible for services under the 
           disabled veterans outreach program, S. 3873, to amend 
           title 38, United States Code, to expand eligibility for 
           Post-9/11 Educational Assistance to members of the 
           National Guard who perform certain full-time duty, S. 
           3979, to amend title 38, United States Code, to make 
           permanent and codify the pilot program for use of 
           contract physicians for disability examinations, S. 
           4047, to increase, effective as of December 1, 2024, 
           the rates of compensation for veterans with service-
           connected disabilities and the rates of dependency and 
           indemnity compensation for the survivors of certain 
           disabled veterans, S. 4074, to amend title 38, United 
           States Code, to authorize the Secretary of Veterans 
           Affairs to approve interstate commerce carrier 
           apprenticeship programs for purposes of veterans 
           educational assistance, S. 4100, to amend title 38, 
           United States Code, to establish the National 
           Cemeteries Foundation to support the educational 
           outreach activities of the Veterans Legacy Program, and 
           an original bill to amend title 38, United States Code, 
           to ensure direct access for families to national 
           cemeteries.
                                                            SR-418
     4 p.m.
       Committee on Armed Services
       Subcommittee on Airland
         To hold hearings to examine Army modernization in review 
           of the Defense Authorization Request for Fiscal Year 
           2025 and the Future Years Defense Program.
                                                           SR-232A
     4:45 p.m.
       Committee on Armed Services
       Subcommittee on Strategic Forces
         To hold hearings to examine the Department of Energys 
           atomic energy defense activities and Department of 
           Defense nuclear weapons programs in review of the 
           Defense Authorization Request for Fiscal Year 2025 and 
           the Future Years Defense Program.
                                                            SR-222

                                APRIL 18
     9:30 a.m.
       Committee on Armed Services
         To hold hearings to examine the posture of the Department 
           of the Army in review of the Defense Authorization 
           Request for Fiscal Year 2025 and the Future Years 
           Defense Program; to be immediately followed by a closed 
           session in SVC-217.
                                                            SH-216
     10 a.m.
       Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs
         To hold an oversight hearing to examine Federal Housing 
           Regulators.
                                                            SD-538
       Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
         To hold hearings to examine the Presidents proposed 
           budget request for fiscal year 2025 for the Department 
           of Homeland Security, focusing on resources and 
           authorities requested to protect and secure the 
           homeland.
                                                            SD-342
       Committee on the Judiciary
         Business meeting to consider S. 1306, to reauthorize the 
           COPS ON THE BEAT grant program, and the nominations of 
           Nancy L. Maldonado, of Illinois, to be United States 
           Circuit Judge for the Seventh Circuit, Georgia N. 
           Alexakis, to be United States District Judge for the 
           Northern District of Illinois, Krissa M. Lanham, and 
           Angela M. Martinez, both to be a United States District 
           Judge for the District of Arizona, Sparkle L. 
           Sooknanan, to be United States District Judge for the 
           District of Columbia, Claria Horn Boom, of Kentucky, 
           and John Gleeson, of New York, both to be a Member of 
           the United States Sentencing Commission, and Matthew L. 
           Gannon, to be United States Attorney for the Northern 
           District of Iowa, David C. Waterman, to be United 
           States Attorney for the Southern District of Iowa, and 
           Gary D. Grimes, Sr., to be United States Marshal for 
           the Western District of Arkansas, all of the Department 
           of Justice.
                                                            SD-G50

                                 MAY 1
     2:30 p.m.
       Committee on Indian Affairs
         Business meeting to consider S. 616, to amend the Leech 
           Lake Band of Ojibwe Reservation Restoration Act to 
           provide for the transfer of additional Federal land to 
           the Leech Lake Band of Ojibwe, S. 2868, to accept the 
           request to revoke the charter of incorporation of the 
           Lower Sioux Indian Community in the State of Minnesota 
           at the request of that Community, S. 3022, to amend the 
           Indian Health Care Improvement Act to allow Indian 
           Health Service scholarship and loan recipients to 
           fulfill service obligations through half-time clinical 
           practice, H.R. 1240, to transfer administrative 
           jurisdiction of certain Federal lands from the Army 
           Corps of Engineers to the Bureau of Indian Affairs, to 
           take such lands into trust for the Winnebago Tribe of 
           Nebraska; to be immediately followed by a hearing to 
           examine S. 465, to require Federal law enforcement 
           agencies to report on cases of missing or murdered 
           Indians, and S. 2695, to amend the Indian Law 
           Enforcement Reform Act to provide for advancements in 
           public safety services to Indian communities.
                                                            SD-628

                                 MAY 2
     10 a.m.
       Committee on Energy and Natural Resources
         To hold hearings to examine the Presidents proposed 
           budget request for fiscal year 2025 for the Department 
           of the Interior.
                                                            SD-366