a dream come true and 
answer to prayers has been the restoration of friendship of the people 
of Bulgaria with America after decades of separation by the Iron 
Curtain.
  The latest achievement has been the establishment in the National 
Assembly of the Republic of Bulgaria of the Friendship Group Bulgaria--
USA. This duplicates the Bulgarian Caucus I founded in 2004 in the U.S. 
Congress, which I now co-chair with Congressman Brad Schneider of 
Illinois, confirming Republican and Democrat appreciation of Bulgaria 
and valued Bulgarian-Americans.
  My affection for the people of Bulgaria began when I was selected by 
Lee Atwater of

the Reagan Administration to be an observer of the Bulgarian National 
Assembly elections on June 10, 1990, on behalf of the International 
Republican Institute. With the collapse of the Soviet Empire, countries 
of Europe, the Baltics, Central Europe, and Central Asia conducted the 
first post-communist elections, replacing totalitarian dictatorships.
  Before arriving in Sofia, my research incorrectly identified Bulgaria 
appreciated being the most subservient Soviet satellite. Upon arriving, 
I found that this was not true as it was instantly inspiring to meet 
courageous Bulgarian patriots restoring democracy, which had been 
destroyed by Nazis and communists.
  Additionally, getting my attention was that Bulgaria and my home 
state of South Carolina were so similar--beautiful beaches to the east, 
mountains to the west, and our respective capitals of Sofia and 
Columbia are both in the center.
  I enjoy confirming to Bulgarians that an extraordinary feature in 
Bulgaria that we do not have in South Carolina are the phenomenal 
structures and antiquities of ancient Thrace, Greece, and Rome being 
the foundation of Western Civilization and remain to remind us of our 
shared heritage.
  Pumping gas myself in college, I especially understand gas stations. 
In 1990, arriving Bulgaria, I only recognized that a pathetic building 
appearing as an outhouse was actually a gas station because there were 
lines of cars waiting patiently--with no gas. Then, I found out the 
cars were not actually cars, but Russian Ladas and East German 
Trabants, being 2-stroke motorcycle engines with a hood.
  Now, I see modern Circle Ks convenience stores fully stocked with a 
Wendys or a Lukoil with a Burger King. And especially good, many cars 
are now X-5 BMWs made in South Carolina--and I want every Bulgarian to 
have a BMW.
  The foundation of the Friendship Group Bulgaria--USA encourages Black 
Sea patriots of Ukraine, Moldova, and Georgia who are under attack by 
war criminal Putin who is insanely seeking to resurrect the failed 
Soviet Union, oppressing the people of Russia.
  One day, Russians will liberate themselves for freedom.
  Last month, I was honored to meet with Defense Minister Atanas 
Zapryanov and Ambassador Georgi Panayatov, with talented Bulgarian 
pilots in Greenville, South Carolina, receiving F-22 jet fighters 
produced by Lockheed Martin.
  We join valued NATO allies Romania and Turkiye in support of 
Bulgaria, as Bulgaria is a vital ally with the Novo Selo NATO Base, 
where young Bulgarians and young Americans train side-by-side for Peace 
Through Strength.
I rise today to honor and congratulate 
Jeff Willis on his retirement from the Big Bear City Fire Department 
after nearly four decades of dedicated service. Throughout his career, 
Jeff served as a firefighter, engineer, captain, division chief, 
assistant chief, fire marshal, and fire chief. Jeff is renowned in our 
community as a selfless and caring individual and is a true friend to 
all who have the privilege of knowing him.
  A resident of the Big Bear community for over 48 years, Jeff attended 
local schools prior to joining the Big Bear City Fire Department as a 
paid call firefighter at 18 years old. Jeff was promoted to paid call 
engineer within 2 years and advanced to the rank of fire captain just 2 
years later--a true testament to his unique skillset and exceptional 
abilities.
  In 2007, at just 43 years old, Jeff became the youngest fire chief in 
the history of the Big Bear City Fire Department. Jeffs additional 
accolades include serving as a board member for the Fire Districts 
Association of California and as both chair and vice chair of the Joint 
Legislative Task Force representing the California Fire Chiefs 
Association.
  Jeffs decorated career and service to Big Bear City would not have 
been possible without the support of his family. His wife, Yvette; his 
three sons, Brandon, Jordan, and Kadon; his two stepsons, Joshua and 
Brennan Eddy; his mother, Barbara; and his late father, Ken, were 
instrumental in supporting his work in keeping our community safe.
  Jeff had a profound impact on our community and the Big Bear City 
Fire Department. Heather and I deeply appreciate Jeff for his years of 
service, and we wish him and his family well as they enter this next 
stage of his already eventful and purposeful life. I ask my colleagues 
to join me in recognizing Jeff Willis and celebrating his retirement.
I am pleased to congratulate Cooper Lehman 
and Braylen Garcia of Hempfield High School on winning the 2025 PIAA 
Class 3A boys Tennis Doubles championship on May 24.
  Senior Cooper Lehman and freshman Braylen Garcia dominated the 2025 
tennis season. Their doubles team was instrumental in Hempfields 15-
win start and claiming the Section One title, second place finish in 
the Lancaster-Lebanon League, and fourth place finish in the district 
3A team tournaments. Ending with a 16-4 record, the Hempfield Black 
Knights advanced to states. On May 24, Lehman and Garcia defeated their 
opponents from Dallastown after climbing back from a large deficit.
  Lehman and Garcia crowned an excellent season with their state title. 
The duo also won the Lancaster-Lebanon League title and the District 
Three title weeks prior. This run wraps up a prolific high school 
career for Cooper Lehman, who will be continuing to play tennis at the 
University of Mary Washington, and it shows great promise for Braylen 
Garcia who is just beginning his high school playing career.
  Winning the Class 3A boys tennis doubles championship is an 
exceptional achievement for Hempfields Cooper Lehman and Braylen 
Garcia, and I congratulate them on their victory. May they hoist their 
medals high with great pride in their efforts. I look forward to seeing 
what these students accomplish next.
I rise today to congratulate this years 
winners of the Congressional Award.
  The Congressional Award honors those who strive to be part of 
something bigger than themselves. With this award, Congress recognizes 
young Americans who devote their free time to an important activity. It 
could be taking on a public service project, pursuing a hobby or new 
skill, starting a physical fitness program, or going on an outdoor 
expedition.
  Participants set goals in these areas, and how they do in meeting 
them determines the level of award they receive, Just as important, 
they receive the sense of pride that comes with fulfilling a mission. 
The program, established in 1979, is a great way to motivate young 
people to develop the building blocks of good citizenship.
  I congratulate each of the awards winners.
  I include in the Record a list of this years Congressional Award 
Gold Medalists from around the country, including three recipients from 
the great state of Wisconsin.

       AK: Joshua Pak
       AL: Grant David Hershbine, Autumn Kerby, Andrew Kerby, 
     Isabella Russell
       AP: Elliott Lee
       AR: Daniel Bragg, Easton Everett, Braden Lisowe
       AZ: Metin Akkaya, Saraa Alshawa, Iris Butler, Joaquin 
     Galindo, Malaika Hayat, Daniel Johnson, Tessa Leon, Mckenna 
     Leon, Roshni Nagarakanti, Noureen Nakshbandi, Merissa Richey, 
     Nicole Spry, Yiyi Sun, Nolan Takeuchi, Rabia Zehra Unver, 
     Tyler Wang
       CA: Benjamin Ahmad, Ashley Ahn, Roshan Ambegaonkar, Iris 
     An, Betul Zeynep Arat, Lucy Ariunbayar, Sawyer Ashland, 
     Kallesh Ashoka, Tristan Barre, Kieran Beckham, Hrishi 
     Bharath, Haley Blackman, Constantine James Blastos, Michael 
     Blastos, Evan Bohne, Alexander Bowen, Aneel Brar, Joshua 
     Brookens, Jackson Bunnin, Asher Bunnin, Alexander Byun, 
     Wilson Callaway, Kelly Campbell, Gabrielle Campbell, Francine 
     Carr, Nathaniel Cha, Dylan Chadwick, Kyle Chan, Nathan Chang, 
     Dongkyu Chang, Scarlett Chang, Tiffany Chang, Tianwen Chen, 
     Seline Cheung, Yagnik Chilamakuri, Hailey Cho, Isabella Choi, 
     Eunice Choi, Jennifer Eunseo Choi, Sumin Choy, Victoria Chun, 
     Matthew Chung, Madison Chung, Christine Chung, Wonnie Chung, 
     Elif Cicek, Alexander Cornell, Sravya Damarla, Rikhil 
     Damarla, Ananya Devkirti, Matthew Dewitt, Annabelle Do, 
     Daniel Eun, Lola Forbes-Black, Luke Fowler, Nolan Freyer, 
     Serena Gandhi, Alec Grantz, Hannah Gu, Bonmin Gu, Chaoming 
     Guo, Lauren Han, Yuxuan He, Annalia Henderson, Miles

     Hexun, Kaden Hong, Yueun Hong, Nathan Hong, Michael Hsieh, 
     Zidong Hu, Nina Huang, Erin Hwang, Daniel Hwang, Manon Iwata, 
     Kanon Iwata, Hyoungjun Jeon, Eunice Jin, Grace Jin, Sonit 
     Joshi, Ryan Jung, Andrew Jung, Aayush Kafle, Sarah Kang, 
     Shriya Kapavarapu, Quade Kelley, Alper Keskinturk, Rohan 
     Khanna, Jason Khauv, Yena Kim, Jacob Kim, Claire Kim, Na 
     Young Kim, Yeonwoo Kim, Edric Kim, Paul Kim, Jayden Kim, Tony 
     Kim, Irene Kim, Eunchan Kim, Minjae Kim, Naomi Kim, Joseph 
     Kim, Sungmin Kim, Sophie Kim, Ryan Kim, Brian Kim, Hannah 
     Kim, Chase Kim, Noah Kim, Taylor Minjun Kim, Jenna Kim, Ted 
     Kim, Nathan Kim, Mooyong Kim, Sophia Kim, Jua Kim, Elisa Kim, 
     Nimeesha Komatireddy, Aditya Kota, Ria Kupumbati, Isaac Kwon, 
     Heather Lam, Skylar Lariviere, Lukas Larkin, Jacqueline 
     Larsen, Claire Lawson, Sarah Lee, Seth Lee, Brandon Lee, 
     Audrey Lee, Chaewon Lee, Junmyeong Lee, Noah Lee, Katherine 
     Lee, Eric Lee, Alex Lee, Alexis Lee, Kangmin Lee, Jonathan 
     Lee, Xenia Lee, Tyler Lee, Olivia Lee, Hannah Lee, Mina Lee, 
     Roanne Lee, Kevin Lee, Janice Lee, Elliot Lee, Benjamin Lee, 
     Christine Li, Walton Li, Joshua Libby, Jihyo Lim, Carson Lim, 
     Dorina Lin, Tyler Liu, Elizabeth Magruder, Sarina Marzbani, 
     Dhilen Mistry, Vishnu Moorthy, Bodhi Morgan, Luke Morrison, 
     Namrata Motwani, Aryan Mukherjee, Audrey Na, Chris Nam, Chase 
     Nam, Sudheshna Narala, Miles Nicholas, Daniel Noh, Anika 
     Nunes, Moferanoluwa Odunaiya, Jaden Oh, Eubin Oh, Arene Oh, 
     Dilek Ozorpak, Evan Pak, Anika Parade, Aarit Parekh, Jimin 
     Park, Kathy Park, Jaehee Park, Keenan Park, Jaeyoon Park, 
     Ryan Park, Zoe Park, Erina Park, Anya Pramanick, Callie 
     Pyken, Bailey Quan, Shivani Raj, Roopa Rajagopalan, Serena 
     Ren, Yeongung Rho, Dilnoor Riar, Amy Roh, Anay Sabhnani, 
     Anika Salaniwal, Krrish Singh Sardar, Adarsh Senthilnathan, 
     Hyeonmin Seo, Krishay Sharma, Ojas Shastri, Kaelyn Shin, 
     Ashley Shin, Daniel Shin, Audrey Shiono, Jaclyn Sim, Sonal 
     Singh, Aanya Singh, Olivia So, Kailyn Song, Yuna Song, 
     Jasmine Sorgen, Alexandra St.Wecker, Levi Stratton, Tanvi 
     Sudireddy, Grace Suk, Ethan Sun, Ciara Tadeo, Evan Takehara, 
     Alyssa Tan, Ertugrul Tan, Eliana Tang, Namith Tatipigari, 
     Ella Townsend, Charu Tripathi, Selen Turkoz, Maren Uyemura, 
     Ananya Vuppula, Arthur Wang, Lixing Wang, Evan Wilson, Chloe 
     Won, David Wong, Yewon Woo, Katelynn Wu, Jenida Yang, Emily 
     Yi, Ella Yoo, Sarah Yoo, Ryan Yoo, Jacob Yun, Cyrus Zahiri, 
     Camy Zahiri, Lilian Zeng, Chenyuan Zhang, Grace Zhao, Andrew 
     Zheng, Audrey Zhu
       CO: Zaina Abouyoussef, Zachary Curtis, Alessandro Fabbri, 
     Amy Gao, Mahi Mehta, Spencer Peesel, Gavin James Schmidt
       CT: Daniel Babashak, Bradford Benton, Pahal Bhasin, 
     Alexander Etergino, Anna Leventon, Bruce Matos, Samuel Peck, 
     Abigail Phelan, Cooper Taylor, Gavin Villepigue
       DC: Sowmya Natarajan, Jordan Williams
       DE: Gabriella Bourantas, Emily Geldreich, Michaela Kim, 
     RoshikNagaSai Patibandla
       FL: Emerson Allen, Caris McKenzie Amador, Gianluca Balzano, 
     Snigdha Beesabathuni, Leena Benbrahim, Chase Bennett, Alexis 
     Benson, Charles Benson, Giulia Canello, Chase Connor, Joshua 
     Cook, Brooke Crabtree, Johannes Csaszar, Hannah Csaszar, 
     Lucas Estrada, Marco Ferri, Noah Forman, John Fox, Nirek 
     Gada, Anya Gada, Andrew Graham, Alyssa Hayman, Sara Husain, 
     Reed Joeckel, Shailey Karri, Lucy Lampkin, Anavi Modi, Arushi 
     Panwar, Chase Pariseleti, Constantino Pena, Ananya Purimetla, 
     Chloe Ryder, Monish Saravana Kumar Divya Sundari, Dhruva 
     Rishi Sharma, Daniela Staton, Hannah Stefanovic, Liza 
     Stephen, Brady Surovek, Zion Tralongo, Shrika Velagapudi, 
     Alice Wenrich, Katerina Zaharewicz
       GA: Beyza Bahar, Malachi Ivey, Sean Lee, Sanaa Scipio, 
     Mihikaa Seth, Sumeda Sriram, Akshaya Tallapally, Rishi 
     Vempati, Victoria Ying, Gene Young Yoon, Aniston Zhang
       HI: Rei Rhymer
       IA: Nicholas Byrum, Nathan Lee
       ID: Amelia Crawford
       IL: Archita Ruby Arun, Annabelle Blevins, Jackson Canellis, 
     Yavuz Er, Connor Gerrish, Aidan Hennessy, Marcel Hill, Keith 
     Jackson, Ava Jurek, Grace Kim, Laura Krowiak, Nailah Mansury, 
     Avi Narepalem, Reyhan Onder, Shreemann Patel, Natalie 
     Rasmussen
       IN: Annamaria Ebersole, Trenton Qualls, Emma Smith, Alisa 
     Yarling
       KS: Shayan Ahmed, Sanjana Akkulugari, Leonard Bertels, 
     Janis Curit, Korbin Davis, Moira Fink, Xiang Jiao, Eshan 
     Patel, Anvita Rayabarapu, Carlos Salazar, Ainesh 
     Tallapragada, Aarush Tallapragada
       KY: William Bache, Elizabeth King, Tyler Solon, Audrey 
     Wallace
       LA: Gangin Lee, Stephen Dominic Sclafani, Peter Yu
       MA: Robert Fawcett, Aarush Gondalia, Joely Gubitosi, Kruthi 
     Gundu, Nathan Kim, Anika Nagle, Anoushka Nagle, Lukeman 
     Nouri, Amarachi Okwor, Lindsey Pagett (Huffman), Arhan 
     Shrivastava, Hayim Sims, Tiffany Strachan, Hannah Sui
       MD: Christopher Biabani, Andrew Bian, Duke Boateng, Andrew 
     Boyce, Ishaan Busireddy, Shrihaan Chaudhary, Mathilda 
     DeCosse, Zana Hess, Neha Kukatla, Martin Meister, Joshua Oh, 
     Simone Pulerwitz-Waisbord, Emily Shi, Michael Shi, Vaishnavi 
     Uppalapati, Chelsea Zhu
       MI: Swathi Jeeda, Griffin Maline, Patrick Phillips, Rakshan 
     Samynathan, Abigail Schafer, Ian Sim, Nisha Singhi
       MN: Alexander Allocco, Ellie Donnay, Thomas Hoffman, 
     Michael Luo
       MO: Nevinka Amarakone, Nethmi Amarakone, Mahith Amarakone, 
     Matthew Austin, Madeline Awad, Caleb Brown, Grace Fu, Andrew 
     Hunt, Henry Naught, Zawadi Oyugi, Benjamin Parker, Vishmi 
     Rajapaksha, Rebecka Stanley, Lilly Stevens
       MS: Jack Durr, Celia Lane, Bradyn Long, Ethan Mccreary, 
     Rebekah Schilling, Morgan White, Tyler Shelton Woods
       NC: Mevlut Atay, Aakash Basarkar, Ishaan Bhasin, Pranav 
     Bhatnagar, Cecilia Elizabeth Boiling, Lola Brienza, Sofia 
     Brienza, Emily DAbreo, Ali Evliya, Indu Gadiraju, Caroline 
     Harris, Rachel Johnson, Emma Johnson, Lucas Johnson, Kendall 
     Leak, Angela Li, Nia MacQueen, William `Kent Mautner, Jack 
     McDermott, Wil Gabriel McDermott, Cameron Mitchell, Finlay 
     Mitchell, Aidan OConnor, Vaideep Pemmada, Ahish Pidikiti, 
     Murat Sahin, Caleb Shin, Stone Simpson, Ejay Tan, Hannah 
     Thovtrup, Colby Townsend, Prakruthi Upadhya, Jacob Yoneoka, 
     Fletcher Yost, Alexander Young
       NH: Maggie Feng, Alexander Miller, Noah Richardson
       NJ: Aarti Advani, Suvit Asnani, Nathaniel Attardi, Suchit 
     Basineni, Jacob Belenkiy, Myanelle Bituin, Nathaniel Chan, 
     Matthew Friscia, Daniel Guo, Seth Hannah, Rex Jacobs, Mahika 
     Jawa, Theo Jeon, Anirudh Joginpalli, Ananya Joginpalli, 
     Mahanth Komuravelli, Anamitra Kugapalan, Caden Masonis, Leah 
     Park, Caleb Park, Josephine Parlo, Yashvi Patel, Jeeya Patel, 
     Khushi Patel, Krisha Patel, Aanya Patel, Abigail Pope, Dongyu 
     Qu, Vikramaditya Rajput, John Reiter, Christopher Rhatigan, 
     Soor Sanghvi, Suhani Sengupta, Aum Shah, Krish Shah, Arushi 
     Singh, Darsh Srivastava, Matthew Strauss, Latif Tabanli, 
     Dylan Thomas, Arden Upadya, Luke Vrankovic, Willow Yoo, 
     Brandon Yu
       NV: Ibrahim Akgedik, Adarsh Anumalasetty, Vanessa Booth, 
     Lara Karaalp, Adeline Kurian, Sammy Skier, Dana Surwill
       NY: Lily Ahlborn, Yashas Balguri, David Brophy, Liam 
     Bullock, Sathvik Charugundla, Samantha Garson, Nora Gupta, 
     Matthew Harrington, Srikarthi Jaggavarapu, Nan Jiang, Meagan 
     Kerins, Catherine Kerins, Logan Kielty, Ella Kim, Jayne Kim, 
     Tyler Maxwell Kodi, Saipraneeth Kotimreddy, Christopher Lau, 
     Franklin Lee, Talia Lioce, Ayan Mahajan, Ahaan Modi, Kaya 
     Parikh, Siddharth Pasari, Saanvi Peri, Siri Polepalle, Ramya 
     Reddi, Rajit Reddi, Jessica Ren, Jenna Ruiz, Paul Schultz, 
     Ryan Smith, Sahana Sundar, Amogh Teepireddy, Noam Traeger, 
     Lancelot Workman, Emma Zhang, Yifan Zhou
       OH: Vidya Akella, Samantha Fleming, Joelle Frederiksen, 
     Arjun Jain, Paul Moody, Prithika Padmanabhan, Shiven Parikh, 
     Prisha Reddy Rajulapalli, Kaitlyn Roberts, Soorya Shanmugam, 
     Aswat Sivakumar, Sahana Srikanth, Sakshum Vij, Riley 
     Wilkerson, Danielle Wolford
       OK: Peyton Mahan
       OR: Grace Choi, Maylie Eby, Soohyon Kim, Annamika Konkola, 
     Jiya Mehta, Caleb Alexander Stonecliffe, Chelsea Teh, Olivia 
     Thornburg
       PA: Eshal Ahmad, Alexander Bland, Sarah Chenoweth, Arianna 
     Fowler, Ria Gandotra, Brent Gaspich, Edward Gebhardt, Sathvik 
     Gopu, Ava Kominski, Andrew Li, Angelina Li, Sarah Liu, Eric 
     Perkins, Theodore Tedesco, Daksh Tiwari, Adam Wyatt
       PR: Ashley Barlow
       RI: Felicity Kushner
       SC: Brooke Dillingham, Sarah Anne Ward
       TN : Iiyana Bachmann, Isabel Hyatt, Kylie Katelyn Patterson
       TX: Wyatt Allen, Shaktivel Anand, Surya Anand, Jenna 
     Barker, Terrence Bell, Luca Campbell, Kaye Chen, Brynn Comes, 
     Sunil Chandra Desha, Gautam Devashish, Ayushmaan Dubey, 
     Cooper Fairman, Alicia Fan, Aidan Farrell, Sophie Fu, 
     Christopher Gaither, Sharon Yajaira Gaona, Shreeya Gedda, 
     Richard Geng, Blake Gibson, Diego Guiot Villarreal, Brendan 
     Hare, Isabella Hicks, Ai-Vy Ho, Aila Jiang, Alyssa Jiang, 
     Simona Jude, Sohum Kanabar, Muammer Kara, Jonathan Le, Jun 
     Lee, Hannah Leem, Elizabeth-Grace Liu, Maya Maliakal, Hitesh 
     Mallula, Panav Mhatre, Courtney Moraa Mayore, Evan Moss, 
     Nathaniel Mun, Saanvi Mylavarapu, Betul Ozgen, Shreya 
     Poladia, Micah Wren Przymus, Beck Riedel, Arya Santosh, Aarah 
     Sardesai, Sydney Shield, Rohan Singhal, Jordan Rylie Smith, 
     William Ryan Smith, Dylan Stump, Sanjay Sai Sundaram, Orlyola 
     Tantchou, Asvini Thivakaran, Siddharth Tripathi, Evan June 
     Wilkerson, Noah Wood, Brian Woodland, Bryant Wu, Reyyan 
     Yorulmaz
       UT: Scarlett Batty, Melbourne Earl, William Evershed, 
     Neset Kablan, Alexander Pham, Yerassyl Sarsekeyev, Colin 
     Smith, Trysten Torgerson, Mahina Vogt
       VA: Shreyes Aier, Murat E. Aksoy, Asude Arslan, Chingiz 
     Bahadur, Isaiah John Boesch, Eli Casey, Gabriel Cervoni, 
     Sriram Chalamacharla, Necla Cubukcu, Owen Davenport, Henry 
     Dozier, Titus Er, Archit Gupta, Aanya Gupta, Ansh Gupta, 
     Aarav Gupta, Zane Javeri, Jason Jayanth, Rachel Kim, Emily 
     Kim, Junseo Kim, Daniel Lee, Richard Li, Hannah Lorenzo, 
     Amayla Lorenzo, Sabrina Lu, Katelyn Lysaght, Caitlyn Murphy, 
     Hashmita Nittala, Gabriel Parsons, Adhya Penati, Hansa Samur, 
     Shivangi Singh, Amrit Singh, Katherine Sullivan, Saatvik 
     Sunilraj, Ella VanStory, Teresa Maria Vithoulkas, Manya 
     Yellepeddy, Sulenur Zirekoglu
       VT: Alexander Califano, Matthew Califano
       WA: Aubrey Jane Moore, Julian Roger, Shawna Sanjay, Simone 
     Shenoi, David van Wingerden, Mihika Venkateswar, Smera 
     Venkateswar, Andrew Yoon

       WI: Suhaeng Huh, Jack Molaison, Rebecca Susmilch
       WY: Julian Edmunds, Axie Elsasser, Taylor Frauendienst, 
     Shelby Hoobler, Shelby Kirkbride, Harper Klinger, James 
     Neishabouri, Kinzley Nusbaum, Michael Tully Rubich, Lukas 
     Salsgiver, Lincoln Searle, Vesper Seitz, Loriana Walter
I rise today to honor the life and legacy of 
Justice David H. Souter, who passed away recently at the age of 85. 
Justice Souter served our Nation with integrity, humility, and an 
abiding respect for the Constitution. In retirement, he spoke rarely 
but when he did, his words resonated with profound clarity. In 2012, he 
warned that democracy cannot survive too much ignorance. He spoke not 
from partisanship, but from deep historical understanding. When 
citizens no longer grasp how their government works, the path opens to 
authoritarianism. He said, ``That is the way democracy dies . . . an 
ignorant people can never remain a free people. Those words echo even 
louder today, when civic trust is fraying, institutions are under 
siege, and loud voices offer simple answers to complex problems. This 
is not a moment for cynicism or despair. But neither is it a time for 
complacency. Justice Souters warning was not about left or right. It 
was about whether we choose understanding over manipulation, engagement 
over apathy. Let us honor his legacy by committing ourselves anew to 
the serious work of fostering a democracy of, by, and for the people.
I rise today to honor the 
Staglin Family Vineyard as they celebrate 40 years of business. The 
longevity of this great establishment is a remarkable accomplishment 
and a testament to the Staglin familys efforts in our community.
  In 1985, the Staglin family purchased an historic estate on 
Rutherford Bench in the heart of Napa Valley. The family estate was 
founded by Shari and Garen Staglin. For four decades, the Staglin 
family has produced wines of remarkable quality from their 61-acre 
Rutherford vineyard.
  The Staglin family approaches winemaking with a deep sense of 
responsibility to the land and our community. They farm their 
Rutherford Bench vineyard organically, invest in renewable energy 
through solar power, and operate a cutting-edge underground production 
facility that reflects their commitment to sustainability. Their work 
is not only about producing high quality wines, but also about 
preserving the character of Napa Valley and developing meaningful 
relationships.
  The Staglin Family Vineyard produces top quality wines in our 
district, most notably Cabernet Sauvignon and Chardonnay from their 
estate under the Staglin and Salus labels. Additionally, they grow and 
bottle a small production of Stagliano Sangiovese, named after Garens 
father, and INEO, a Bordeaux Blend.
  The Staglin family has proven to be dedicated members of our 
community through more than just winemaking. The family motto, ``Great 
wines for great causes, rings true as they regularly engage in 
philanthropic wine and other donations. Since 1985, they have 
collectively raised over $1 billion to support charities, including 
championing their main cause, mental health. Their efforts have 
culminated in the founding of a non-profit, known as One Mind, which 
has raised over $600 million in the past thirty years. The 
organizations mission seeks to radically accelerate cures for brain 
illnesses and injuries by funding and fostering scientific research 
collaborations and initiatives, to achieve healthy brains for all. I 
was proud to collaborate with Garen Staglin and introduce the 
bipartisan Mental Health Research Accelerator Act to incentivize 
private companies with financial resources to collaborate with academic 
or nonprofit research institutions on neurological and mental health 
research to tackle the root causes of mental health conditions.
  The Staglins are leaders in our community. They are actively 
involved in the Napa Valley Vintners, Napa Valley Grape Growers, Napa 
Communities Firewise Foundation, Mentis, Copia, and many other 
community organizations.
  The Staglin family is distinguished by a strong foundation in higher 
education and public service. Garen Staglin earned an MBA from Stanford 
University and Shari Staglin received an MPA from New York University. 
Shannon Staglin holds an MBA from UC Davis, and Brandon Staglin earned 
a Master of Science in Healthcare Administration and Interpersonal 
Leadership from UC San Francisco.
, the Staglin family has established a legacy befitting 
their enduring commitment and passion to serving our community through 
winemaking and philanthropy. It is therefore fitting and proper that we 
honor their work here today.
I am proud to introduce the Medical Research 
for Our Troops Act, a bill to amend the Full-Year Continuing 
Appropriations and Extensions Act, 2025, by restoring essential funding 
for Congressionally Directed Medical Research Programs within the 
Department of Defense Account. I thank my colleague, Rep. Mike Levin 
for joining me as a co-lead of this important legislation, the 21 
original cosponsors who support the bill, and the 66 organizations who 
endorse the bill text.
  Congressionally Directed Medical Research Programs have been 
instrumental in advancing groundbreaking medical research that directly 
benefit our service members and veterans. Over the years, this program 
has supported lifesaving innovations in areas such as traumatic brain 
injury. PTSD, breast cancer, and other conditions that 
disproportionately affect our military community. Many treatments and 
therapies that were once experimental are now standard care, thanks to 
the success and dedication of Congressionally Directed Medical Research 
Programs-funded research.
  Our bill restores funding to levels aligned with the Consolidated 
Appropriations Act, 2024, ensuring continuity of these vital research 
efforts. By doing so, we reaffirm our commitment to sustaining the 
momentum of these proven programs that save lives and improve the 
health outcomes of those who serve our Nation.
  I urge my colleagues to support this legislation to ensure that 
medical research for our troops and veterans remains strong, 
innovative, and fully funded.
on Tuesday, June 10, 2025, I voted NAY but 
intended to vote YEA on Roll Call No. 163.
wrong-patient, wrong-site, and wrong-procedure 
surgeries are rare, but can be life-altering for patients. Members of 
the Association of PeriOperative Registered Nurses (AORN) are committed 
to safe surgery. Since 2004, AORN and the Joint Commission have 
recognized National Time Out Day to bring greater awareness to the safe 
surgery practice of taking a ``time out before operative and other 
invasive procedures to prevent wrong-site, wrong-patient, wrong-
procedure surgery.
  The National Time Out Day initiative supports the Joint Commissions 
Universal Protocol and builds greater awareness among surgical and 
procedural team members about the critical steps that keep patients 
safe. This initiatives goal is to prevent errors by ensuring that all 
members of the surgical team pause before invasive procedures, so they 
can communicate as a group and confirm key information about the 
patient and the procedure.
  I commend perioperative and procedural teams in hospitals across 
Texas 21st Congressional District for their hard work and dedication 
every day to ensure safe environments for procedural and surgical 
patients. I also applaud their efforts to reduce unnecessary healthcare 
costs.
  Today, I recognize these efforts on behalf of my constituents, 
celebrating June 11, 2025, as National Time Out Day in District 21 and 
across Texas.
I rise to recognize the 100th 
Anniversary of the City of Mascotte, Florida. Officially incorporated 
on November 23, 1925, Mascotte has grown, flourished over the past 
century, and this year, the city will mark this historic milestone with 
a Centennial Celebration on Saturday, June 21, 2025.
  The roots of Mascotte trace back to around 1885, when founder J.W. 
Payne first settled the area. The city takes its name from the 
Mascotte, a ship owned by Tampa civic leader Henry B. Plant. The 
vessel, which played a role in transporting tobacco from Cuba during 
the Spanish-American War, is proudly on the citys official seal.
  Located in the southwestern portion of Lake County, the City of 
Mascotte today is a thriving and diverse community providing a full 
range of essential municipal services to its residents. Now home to 
over 9,000 residents, Mascotte continues to grow while preserving the 
small-town charm and close-knit community spirit that has defined it 
for generations. Mascotte is a place where families raise their 
children, businesses find opportunity, and neighbors support one 
another.
  It is my privilege to honor and celebrate the City of Mascotte on the 
occasion of its centennial anniversary. May the next 100 years be as 
vibrant and prosperous as the first.
Title IV of Senate Resolution 4, agreed to by the Senate of February 
4, 1977, calls for establishment of a system for a computerized 
schedule of all meetings and hearings of Senate committees, 
subcommittees, joint committees, and committees of conference. This 
title requires all such committees to notify the Office of the Senate 
Daily Digest--designated by the Rules Committee--of the time, place and 
purpose of the meetings, when scheduled and any cancellations or 
changes in the meetings as they occur.
  As an additional procedure along with the computerization of this 
information, the Office of the Senate Daily Digest will prepare this 
information for printing in the Extensions of Remarks section of the 
Congressional Record on Monday and Wednesday of each week.
  Meetings scheduled for Thursday, June 12, 2025 may be found in the 
Daily Digest of todays Record.

                                JUNE 17
     10:15 a.m.
       Committee on the Judiciary
         To hold hearings to examine scammers exposed, focusing on 
           protecting older Americans from transnational crime 
           networks.
                                                            SD-226
     10:30 a.m.
       Committee on Appropriations
       Subcommittee on Department of Defense
         To hold closed hearings to examine proposed budget 
           estimates for fiscal year 2026 for the intelligence 
           community.
                                                           SVC-217
       Committee on Appropriations
       Subcommittee on Military Construction, Veterans Affairs, 
           and Related Agencies
         To hold hearings to examine proposed budget estimates for 
           fiscal year 2026 for military construction and family 
           housing.
                                                            SD-124
     2:30 p.m.
       Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation
       Subcommittee on Consumer Protection, Technology, and Data 
           Privacy
         To hold hearings to examine the World Anti Doping Agency, 
           focusing on swimming in denial over Chinese doping.
                                                            SR-253

                                JUNE 18
     9:30 a.m.
       Committee on Armed Services
         To hold hearings to examine the Presidents proposed 
           budget request for fiscal year 2026 and the Future 
           Years Defense Program for the Department of Defense; to 
           be immediately followed by a closed session in SVC-217.
                                                            SD-G50
     10 a.m.
       Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation
       Subcommittee on Surface Transportation, Freight, Pipelines, 
           and Safety
         To hold hearings to examine modernizing Americas rail 
           network.
                                                            SR-253
       Committee on Energy and Natural Resources
         To hold hearings to examine the Presidents proposed 
           budget request for fiscal year 2026 for the Department 
           of Energy.
                                                            SD-366
       Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions
         To hold hearings to examine the nominations of Jonathan 
           Berry, of Maryland, to be Solicitor, Andrew Rogers, of 
           Virginia, to be Administrator of the Wage and Hour 
           Division, and Anthony DEsposito, of New York, to be 
           Inspector General, all of the Department of Labor, and 
           Andrea Lucas, of Virginia,

           to be a Member of the Equal Employment Opportunity 
           Commission.
                                                            SD-430
     10:15 a.m.
       Committee on the Judiciary
         Business meeting to consider pending calendar business.
                                                            SD-226
     10:30 a.m.
       Committee on Appropriations
       Subcommittee on Department of Defense
         To hold hearings to examine proposed budget estimates for 
           fiscal year 2026 for the Army.
                                                            SD-192