I rise today to recognize Ms. Carol B. 
Dover, the 2024 inductee into the Florida Tourism Hall of Fame. Since 
2001, this honor has been awarded annually to figures whose vision has 
positively and significantly impacted the development of Floridas 
tourism industry.
  Since 1995, Ms. Dover has served as President and Chief Executive 
Officer of the more than 10,000-member Florida Restaurant and Lodging 
Association (FRLA). In 1989, Ms. Dover was appointed Deputy Chief of 
Staff within the Executive Office of the Governor. She was also the 
first woman to serve as Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention in the 
Florida State Fire Marshalls Office. In her capacity with the FRLA, 
, a key 
addition to Floridas rapidly growing equestrian industry.
  During the COVID-19 pandemic, Ms. Dover worked tirelessly to ensure 
governmental support for and the continual operation of Floridas 
tourism industry. She was a key advocate in relocating the FRLA 
Headquarters to Tallahassee, strengthening the relationship between 
Florida restaurants and policymakers. Furthermore, as a cancer 
survivor, Ms. Dover has served as an advocate for research and 
awareness.
, I invite you to join me in honoring Ms. Carol B. Dover 
as she is inducted into the Florida Tourism Hall of Fame.
COMMEMORATING THE LIFE AND LEGACY OF ALBERT J. ``SKIP GAZY
I rise to commemorate the life and legacy 
of Albert J. ``Skip Gazy of Niagara Falls, NY.
  On September 3, 2024, Albert J. ``Skip Gazy, 95, of Niagara Falls, 
NY, passed away peacefully at Our Lady of Peace Nursing Care Residence. 
Born and raised in Niagara Falls, he was the son of the late Nasri and 
Victoria (Jacob) Gazy, and the devoted husband of Ramona Gazy, whom he 
married on June 15, 1968. Albert served proudly in the United States 
National Guard. He worked alongside his brothers at Gazy Brothers 
Texaco Station until it closed in 1981, later retiring after many years 
of service with the Niagara Falls City School District.
  As a passionate boxing enthusiast, Albert boxed at the Niagara Falls 
Boys Club in his youth. Known for his sharp sense of humor, Albert 
found great joy in bringing laughter to those around him. His greatest 
joy, however, was spending time with his family, especially his three 
beloved granddaughters.
  Albert was preceded in death by his wife, Ramona, but survived by his 
children, Monique (Keith) Crossley and Louis DalPorto; his 
granddaughters, Danielle DalPorto, Samantha DalPorto, and Elise Gazy; 
daughter-in-law Joanne DalPorto; as well as numerous nieces, nephews, 
loved ones and friends.
  As we remember Albert ``Skip Gazy, we grieve the loss of a 
dedicated husband, father, and grandfather and a beloved member of our 
community.
I rise to commemorate the life and legacy 
of Anthony P. Amigone, Sr.
  Anthony P. Amigone, Sr. passed away peacefully on September 7, 2024, 
in Florida at the age of 92, surrounded by his beloved family. Born on 
January 5, 1932, in Buffalo, New York, Mr. Amigone remained deeply 
connected to his hometown throughout his life. He is survived by his 
devoted wife, Marjorie L. Parmelee, and his children: Mary Amigone-
Jennings, Anthony P. Amigone, Jr., Vincent J. Amigone, Sr., and 
Danielle Marie Amigone. He also leaves behind a large extended family 
of grandchildren and great-grandchildren.
, the Simmons 
Institute of Mortuary Science, and several local schools, including 
Kensington High School and Canisius High School. As the chairman of 
Amigone Funeral Home, Inc., a family business established in 1926, he 
became a licensed funeral director in New York in 1953 and later in 
Pennsylvania in 1976. Under his leadership, the company expanded 
significantly, growing from its original location to 13 branches across 
Western New York. His innovative vision led to the creation of the 
citys first modern funeral home, as well as the distinctive ``Amigone 
Blue fleet, a signature mark of the business.
  Throughout his career, Mr. Amigone served his community and 
established himself as a preeminent figure in his industry, Among 
several other posts, Mr. Amigone served as President of the National 
Association of Approved Morticians, the President of the New York State 
Funeral Directors Association, and the District Governor of the 
National Funeral Directors Association.
  In addition to his professional accomplishments, Mr. Amigone served 
in the U.S. Army during the Korean War and was stationed in the Far 
East as part of the Graves Registration Unit. He also briefly worked 
for Mitsubishi Chemical in Japan and had the honor of being received by 
the Emperor of Japan. In 1955, he was instrumental in modernizing 
funeral practices in Hong Kong.
  A devout Catholic, Mr. Amigone had the rare privilege of a private 
audience with Pope John XXIII in 1958. He was also a dedicated 
community leader, honored as Buffalonian of the Year in 1987, and 
active in numerous civic and professional organizations, including the 
Rotary Club, Knights of Columbus, and several chambers of commerce. A 
man of many interests, Mr. Amigone was a passionate reader with a love 
for Shakespeare and enjoyed boating as well as playing the piano, 
particularly the song ``Deep Purple.
  Today, we honor Anthony P. Amigone, Sr. and we commemorate his 
unwavering commitment to Western New York. Mr. Amigones legacy endures 
through his loving family, the continued success of his family 
business, and the profound impact he made on the Buffalo community.
I rise to honor the Zuni Olla 
Maidens for the critical role they play in Zuni culture, establishing 
themselves as ambassadors for all Pueblo communities and proving that 
traditions are not only necessary for the soul but all future 
generations.
  The Zuni Olla Maidens perform a delicate dance that includes jars or 
ollas balanced on top of their heads. It is breathtaking to watch. For 
this beautiful dance, they have been rightfully honored as 2024 
National Endowment for the Arts National Heritage Fellows.
  The dance brings together the beauty of the music together with 
colors and jewelry and clothing to bring beauty to our world. There is 
a power in this ceremony that flows before the singing, the drums and 
the rattles. The Zuni songs remind us how small we are in this world 
and that we need to remember the origins and culture of our people and 
our homes.
  I am honored to recognize the significance of these matriarchs. Where 
there are powerful women, there are powerful families and communities. 
Let the traditions of the Zuni people ring forever in the halls of 
Congress.
last week, contestants competed in the 72nd 
Annual Miss Navajo Nation Pageant in my district.
  To become Miss Navajo, contestants participate in a rigorous week-
long annual competition, which requires contestants to demonstrate 
proficiency in both the Navajo and English languages, knowledge of 
Navajo culture and beliefs, business interviews, contemporary talents, 
and traditional skills such as sheep butchering and preparing 
traditional foods.
  Id like to recognize Amy Naazbah Reeves-Begaye, who has served as 
Miss Navajo for the past year.
  I met Amy last year during her first trip to the U.S. Capitol and 
learned about her experience and background and the process of becoming 
Miss Navajo.
  Weve had a few chances to connect throughout the years and Ive been 
impressed with her hard work and professionalism.
  Shes been a strong leader and advocate for Navajo history and 
culture.
  I thank Amy for her leadership as Miss Navajo over the last year. I 
wish her the best in her future endeavors and know that she will 
continue to make the Navajo Nation proud.
I rise today to honor the life 
of a remarkable man, Mr. John Billy Purry, Sr., who passed away on July 
31, 2024, at the age of 90. Mr. Purry was born on May 30, 1934, and 
from that moment, his life became a testament to hard work, dedication, 
and a commitment to his community.
a resident of Brandon, Mississippi. He 
was a pillar, a foundation upon which countless lives were built. His 
kindness and generosity were unmatched. No matter the task or the need, 
, leading with a helping hand. His influence 
touched the lives of so many who had the pleasure of knowing him, and 
his legacy will continue to shape his family, friends, and the 
community for years to come.
  Whether volunteering, providing guidance to the younger generations, 
or simply being a neighbor people could count on, Mr. Purrys presence 
was always felt. His leadership wasnt formal or announced--it was 
quiet, steady, and strong. He led by example, demonstrating that real 
success comes not from personal gain but from the positive impact one 
can make on others.
  He was a devoted family man, a loyal friend, and a respected figure 
in the community. Mr. Purry lived his life with humility, integrity, 
and an unmatched love for the people

around him. His passing leaves a void that will be difficult to fill, 
but his spirit will forever remain in the hearts of those who knew him.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in honoring the life of 
, Sr. His legacy of kindness, service, and 
selflessness is a model for us all, and his memory will continue to 
inspire generations to come. May he rest in peace.
due to an unforeseen circumstance, I was 
unable to cast my votes for H.R. 1157 or H.R. 8333. Had I been present, 
I would have voted: YEA on Roll Call No. 401, and YEA on Roll Call No. 
402.
when I was a boy, I thought that 
heroes were imaginary characters who wore capes or masks that hide 
their secret identity. As I grew older, I came to realize that there 
are heroes around us every day: police, firefighters, first responders, 
and of course, our men and women who serve in the armed forces.
  Twenty-three years ago today, when our Nation and this city were 
attacked by pure evil, the world saw that America is made of heroes, 
The world watched as we came together to search, rescue, pray and 
grieve together. Heroes by trade and heroes by choice answered the call 
across the land.
  Thats why today, in the town of Orange Park in the free state of 
Florida, you will see hundreds of Star-Spangled Banners flying to 
recognize the heroes who protect us every day.
  Flags for Heroes is not just an event, its a movement. The Rotary 
Club of Orange Park Sunrise, led by President Duane Mallicoat, has put 
together this incredible display to honor men and women who know the 
true meaning of being a hero.
  Each of these flags is individually dedicated to a hero who has 
personally touched the life of someone in our community.
  Today, as we remember one of the great tragedies in American history, 
I encourage my colleagues to honor the heroes who protected us then and 
protect us still today.
today I rise to recognize Steve Massini, 
who is retiring as Chief Executive Officer of Penn State Health, a 
position he has served in since 2019.
2015 as chief financial 
officer for Milton S. Hershey Medical Center before being promoted to 
executive vice president, chief financial officer, and chief 
administrative officer for Penn State Health.
  Throughout his tenure at Penn State Health, the system has grown 
significantly, 11 developed strategic partnerships, and made 
investments in expanding the systems reach across South Central 
Pennsylvania. These investments included the development of a hospital 
in Pennsylvanias 11th Congressional District, the Lancaster Medical 
Center, which opened in October 2022. I appreciated the opportunity to 
visit this and other Penn State Health facilities in our district to 
learn about the great work they are doing to serve patients.
  I have appreciated Mr. Massinis feedback and perspective on federal 
policies and the impact they have on residents of Pennsylvanias 11th 
Congressional District.
, I wish Steve the best in all his future endeavors and 
thank him for all he has done to make a positive impact in our 
community.
whether somethings ablaze in your 
house or theres a hot button issue in Jacksonville, theres one man 
you can depend on to put out the fire.
, I rise today to honor Jacksonvilles City Council 
President, Randy White for 70 stellar years on this planet Earth. A 
lifelong public servant, Councilman White embodies the spirit of 
Northeast Florida. Councilman White is a family man with two children 
and 5 grandchildren. However, his 32-year career with the Jacksonville 
Fire and Rescue Department shows that he views the entirety of 
Jacksonville as his family.
  After three decades of putting out fires and rescuing cats from 
trees, one might think that Councilman White would be tired. But no. 
Instead, he championed the growth of Cecil Field and public safety in 
Jacksonville.
  I ask my colleagues to join me today in commending Councilman Randy 
White for his decades of public service. Jacksonville is truly a much 
better place because of Councilman White. Happy Birthday.
Title IV of Senate Resolution 4, agreed to by the Senate of February 
4, 1977, calls for establishment of a system for a computerized 
schedule of all meetings and hearings of Senate committees, 
subcommittees, joint committees, and committees of conference. This 
title requires all such committees to notify the Office of the Senate 
Daily Digest--designated by the Rules Committee--of the time, place and 
purpose of the meetings, when scheduled and any cancellations or 
changes in the meetings as they occur.
  As an additional procedure along with the computerization of this 
information, the Office of the Senate Daily

Digest will prepare this information for printing in the Extensions of 
Remarks section of the Congressional Record on Monday and Wednesday of 
each week.
  Meetings scheduled for Thursday, September 12, 2024 may be found in 
the Daily Digest of todays Record.

     9:30 a.m.
       Committee on Armed Services
         To hold hearings to examine the nominations of Lieutenant 
           General Randall Reed, USAF, to be general and 
           Commander, United States Transportation Command, and 
           Lieutenant General Xavier T. Brunson, USA, to be 
           general and Commander, United Nations Command/Combined 
           Forces Command/United States Forces Korea, both of the 
           Department of Defense.
                                                            SH-216
     10 a.m.
       Committee on Finance
         To hold hearings to examine lowering health care costs 
           for Americans, focusing on the Inflation Reduction Act.
                                                            SD-215
       Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
         To hold hearings to examine the national security risks 
           of replacing nonpartisan civil servants with political 
           appointees, focusing on ensuring a trustworthy 
           government.
                                                            SD-342
       Committee on the Judiciary
         To hold hearings to examine stemming the tide of hate 
           crimes in America.
                                                            SD-G50
     2 p.m.
       Committee on the Judiciary
       Subcommittee on Privacy, Technology, and the Law
         To hold an oversight hearing to examine AI, focusing on 
           insiders perspectives.
                                                            SD-226
     2:30 p.m.
       Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs
       Subcommittee on Financial Institutions and Consumer 
           Protection
         To hold hearings to examine risks and harm in the private 
           student lending and servicing market.
                                                            SD-538
       Select Committee on Intelligence
         To receive a closed briefing on certain intelligence 
           matters.
                                                           SVC-217

     10 a.m.
       Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation
         To hold hearings to examine aviation cybersecurity 
           threats.
                                                            SR-253
       Committee on Environment and Public Works
         To hold hearings to examine Americas regional 
           commissions, focusing on sharing best practices in 
           regional and economic development.
                                                            SD-406
       Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
         Business meeting to continue to consider S. 4667, to 
           amend title 31, United States Code, to establish the 
           Life Sciences Research Security Board, S. 4373, to 
           provide for congressional approval of national 
           emergency declarations, S. 4495, to enable safe, 
           responsible, and agile procurement, development, and 
           use of artificial intelligence by the Federal 
           Government, S. 4675, to require the United States 
           Postal Service to submit a comprehensive proposal to 
           the Postal Regulatory Commission before implementing 
           any network changes, S. 4630, to establish an 
           interagency committee to harmonize regulatory regimes 
           in the United States relating to cybersecurity, S. 
           4654, to amend the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief 
           and Emergency Assistance Act to allow Indian tribal 
           governments to directly request fire management 
           assistance declarations and grants, S. 4698, to 
           authorize the Joint Task Forces of the Department of 
           Homeland Security, S. 4711, to limit the consideration 
           of marijuana use when making an employment suitability 
           or security clearance determination, S. 4681, to ensure 
           a timely, fair, meaningful, and transparent process for 
           individuals to seek redress because they were wrongly 
           identified as a threat under the screening and 
           inspection regimes used by the Department of Homeland 
           Security, to require a report on the effectiveness of 
           enhanced screening programs of the Department of 
           Homeland Security, S. 4043, to amend title 5, United 
           States Code, to make executive agency telework policies 
           transparent, to track executive agency use of telework, 
           S. 4679, to amend title XLI of the FAST Act to improve 
           the Federal permitting process, S. 4716, to amend 
           section 7504 of title 31, United States Code, to 
           improve the single audit requirements, S. 4294, to 
           direct the Secretary of Homeland Security to negotiate 
           with the Government of Canada regarding an agreement 
           for integrated cross border aerial law enforcement 
           operations, S. 59, to implement merit-based reforms to 
           the civil service hiring system that replace degree-
           based hiring with skills-and competency-based hiring, 
           S. 4676, to enhance the effectiveness of the Shadow 
           Wolves Program, S. 4672, to require the Commissioner 
           for U.S. Customs and Border Protection to assess 
           current efforts to respond to hazardous weather and 
           water events at or near United States borders and, to 
           the extent such efforts may be improved, to develop a 
           hazardous weather and water events preparedness and 
           response strategy, S. 4697, to enhance the 
           cybersecurity of the Healthcare and Public Health 
           Sector, S. 4715, to require the National Cyber Director 
           to submit to Congress a plan to establish an institute 
           within the Federal Government to serve as a centralized 
           resource and training center for Federal cyber 
           workforce development, S. 4631, to amend title 41, 
           United States Code, to prohibit minimum education 
           requirements for proposed contractor personnel in 
           certain contract solicitations, S. 4700, to modify the 
           governmentwide financial management plan, S. 4656, to 
           amend title 5, United States Code, concerning 
           restrictions on the participation of certain Federal 
           employees in partisan political activity, S. 4651, to 
           require agencies to use information and communications 
           technology products obtained from original equipment 
           manufacturers or authorized resellers, S. 4419, to 
           require the Science and Technology Directorate in the 
           Department of Homeland Security to develop greater 
           capacity to detect, identify, and disrupt illicit 
           substances in very low concentrations, S. 4321, to 
           amend title 5, United States Code, to prohibit the 
           payment of annuities and retired pay to individuals 
           convicted of certain sex crimes, S. 2546, to designate 
           the facility of the United States Postal Service 
           located at 100 North Taylor Lane in Patagonia, Arizona, 
           as the ``Jim Kolbe Memorial Post Office, S. 3946, to 
           designate the facility of the United States Postal 
           Service located at 1106 Main Street in Bastrop, Texas, 
           as the ``Sergeant Major Billy D. Waugh Post Office, 
           S. 4077, to designate the facility of the United States 
           Postal Service located at 180 Steuart Street in San 
           Francisco, California, as the ``Dianne Feinstein Post 
           Office, H.R. 5527, to amend section 1078 of the 
           National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2018 
           to increase the effectiveness of the Technology 
           Modernization Fund, H.R. 7219, to ensure that Federal 
           agencies rely on the best reasonably available 
           scientific, technical, demographic, economic, and 
           statistical information and evidence to develop, issue 
           or inform the public of the nature and bases of Federal 
           agency rules and guidance, H.R. 7524, to amend title 
           40, United States Code, to require the submission of 
           reports on certain information technology services 
           funds to Congress before expenditures may be made, H.R. 
           3254, to amend the Homeland Security Act of 2002 to 
           establish a process to review applications for certain 
           grants to purchase equipment or systems that do not 
           meet or exceed any applicable national voluntary 
           consensus standards, H.R. 6174, to improve the 
           biodetection functions of the Department of Homeland 
           Security, H.R. 272, to amend title 31, United States 
           Code, to authorize transportation for Government 
           astronauts returning from space between their residence 
           and various locations, H.R. 4403, to amend the Homeland 
           Security Act of 2002 to make improvements to the 
           Securing the Cities program, H.R. 5887, to amend 
           chapter 3 of title 5, United States Code, to improve 
           Government service delivery, and build related capacity 
           for the Federal Government, H.R. 7525, to require the 
           Director of the Office of Management and Budget to 
           issue guidance to agencies requiring special districts 
           to be recognized as local government for the purpose of 
           Federal financial assistance determinations, H.R. 4467, 
           to direct the Under Secretary for Management of the 
           Department of Homeland Security to assess contracts for 
           covered services performed by contractor personnel 
           along the United States land border with Mexico, H.R. 
           599, to designate the facility of the United States 
           Postal Service located at 3500 West 6th Street, Suite 
           103 in Los Angeles, California, as the ``Dosan Ahn 
           Chang Ho Post Office, H.R. 1060, to designate the 
           facility of the United States Postal Service located at 
           1663 East Date Place in San Bernardino, California, as 
           the ``Dr. Margaret B. Hill Post Office Building, H.R. 
           1098, to designate the facility of the United States 
           Postal Service located at 50 East Derry Road in East 
           Derry, New Hampshire, as the ``Chief Edward B. Garone 
           Post Office, H.R. 1555, to designate the facility of 
           the United States Postal Service located at 2300 Sylvan 
           Avenue in Modesto, California, as the ``Corporal 
           Michael D. Anderson Jr. Post Office Building, H.R. 
           3608, to designate the facility of the United States 
           Postal Service located at 28081 Marguerite

           Parkway in Mission Viejo, California, as the ``Major 
           Megan McClung Post Office Building, H.R. 3728, to 
           designate the facility of the United States Postal 
           Service located at 25 Dorchester Avenue, Room 1, in 
           Boston, Massachusetts, as the ``Caroline Chang Post 
           Office, H.R. 5476, to designate the facility of the 
           United States Postal Service located at 1077 River 
           Road, Suite 1, in Washington Crossing, Pennsylvania, as 
           the ``Susan C. Barnhart Post Office, H.R. 5640, to 
           designate the facility of the United States Postal 
           Service located at 12804 Chillicothe Road in 
           Chesterland, Ohio, as the ``Sgt. Wolfgang Kyle Weninger 
           Post Office Building, H.R. 5712, to designate the 
           facility of the United States Postal Service located at 
           220 Fremont Street in Kiel, Wisconsin, as the ``Trooper 
           Trevor J. Casper Post Office Building, H.R. 5985, to 
           designate the facility of the United States Postal 
           Service located at 517 Seagaze Drive in Oceanside, 
           California, as the ``Charlesetta Reece Allen Post 
           Office Building, H.R. 6073, to designate the facility 
           of the United States Postal Service located at 9925 
           Bustleton Avenue in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, as the 
           ``Sergeant Christopher David Fitzgerald Post Office 
           Building, H.R. 6651, to designate the facility of the 
           United States Postal Service located at 603 West 3rd 
           Street in Necedah, Wisconsin, as the ``Sergeant Kenneth 
           E. Murphy Post Office Building, H.R. 7192, to 
           designate the facility of the United States Postal 
           Service located at 333 West Broadway in Anaheim, 
           California, as the ``Dr. William I. `Bill Kott Post 
           Office Building, H.R. 7199, to designate the facility 
           of the United States Postal Service located at 
           S74w16860 Janesville Road, in Muskego, Wisconsin, as 
           the ``Colonel Hans Christian Heg Post Office, H.R. 
           7423, to designate the facility of the United States 
           Postal Service located at 103 Benedette Street in 
           Rayville, Louisiana, as the ``Luke Letlow Post Office 
           Building, and the nominations of Sherri Malloy 
           Beatty-Arthur, Rahkel Bouchet, Erin Camille Johnston, 
           Ray D. McKenzie, and John Cuong Truong, each to be an 
           Associate Judge of the Superior Court of the District 
           of Columbia, Ann C. Fisher, of South Dakota, and Ashley 
           Jay Elizabeth Poling, of North Carolina, both to be a 
           Commissioner of the Postal Regulatory Commission, and 
           Carmen G. Iguina Gonzalez, and Joseph Russell Palmore, 
           both to be an Associate Judge of the District of 
           Columbia Court of Appeals.
                                                            SD-342
       Committee on Indian Affairs
         To hold hearings to examine the nomination of Patrice H. 
           Kunesh, of Minnesota, to be Chairman of the National 
           Indian Gaming Commission.
                                                            SD-628
     2 p.m.
       Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry
       Subcommittee on Food and Nutrition, Specialty Crops, 
           Organics, and Research
         To hold hearings to examine keeping kids learning in the 
           National School Lunch Program and School Breakfast 
           Program.
                                                            SD-562
       Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs
       Subcommittee on Economic Policy
         To hold hearings to examine the macroeconomic impacts of 
           potential tax reform in 2025.
                                                            SD-538
       Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe
         To hold hearings to examine Russias imperial identity.
                                                       2358-C-RHOB
     2:30 p.m.
       Committee on Small Business and Entrepreneurship
         To hold hearings to examine streamlining and coordinating 
           support for rural small businesses.
                                                           SR-428A
       Select Committee on Intelligence
         To hold hearings to examine foreign threats to elections 
           in 2024, focusing on roles and responsibilities of U.S. 
           tech providers.
                                                            SH-216
     3 p.m.
       Committee on Veterans Affairs
         To hold hearings to examine current and future VA budget 
           challenges, focusing on providing for veterans.
                                                            SR-418

     10 a.m.
       Committee on Energy and Natural Resources
         To hold hearings to examine fusion energy technology 
           development and commercialization efforts.
                                                            SD-366

     10 a.m.
       Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions
         To hold hearings to examine Novo Nordisks high prices 
           for Ozempic and Wegovy for patients with diabetes and 
           obesity.
                                                            SD-562
it is my great honor to recognize community 
leader and Solana Beach resident Lisa Montes as my September 2023 
Constituent of the Month.
  Lisa is a descendent of the original Mexican families of La Colonia 
de Eden Gardens, and she has a passion for giving back to her community 
that was instilled in her by her ancestors. I know she is making them 
proud today. Lisa devotes her time and effort to numerous

local organizations dedicated to serving and empowering Latino and 
Latina students and the community at-large.
  During Hispanic Heritage Month, I am thrilled to recognize the 
efforts of leaders, like Lisa, whose service to others strengthens our 
unique and diverse community. Im so grateful for residents of 
Californias 49th Congressional District who dedicate their lives to 
the betterment of our community, and Im proud to honor Lisa Montes as 
my Constituent of the Month.
TRIBUTE CELEBRATING THE 100TH ANNIVERSARY OF THE U.S. FOREST SERVICES 
                              of kentucky
I rise today to celebrate the 
100th Anniversary of the U.S. Forest Services Redbird Ranger Station 
Club House in southeastern Kentucky, which has a rich history tied to 
Henry Ford, founder of the Ford Motor Company and Fordson Coal Company.
  Southern and Eastern Kentucky has an abundance of historic American 
treasures tucked away in our Appalachian communities, like the Redbird 
Purchase Unit. Location names in the mountains preface the stories that 
unfold on the land, including the fork in the Kentucky River where this 
unit is located, named for Chief Red Bird, a legendary Cherokee.
  The Ford Motor Company owned 60,000 acres in the Daniel Boone 
National Forest to harvest timber when hardwood was used for automobile 
parts and wheel spokes. The land was eventually acquired by the U.S. 
Forest Service and today, the Redbird Purchase Unit includes nearly 
146,000 acres of the forest. Mary Breckinridge, the regions famous 
nursing pioneer who established the Frontier Nursing Service to offer 
prenatal care to Appalachian women, personally visited Washington, D.C. 
to advocate for the federal purchase unit to help protect and manage 
the forest at the headwaters of the Kentucky River. Mary Breckinridge 
was a friend of Henry Fords wife, Clara, who helped support her 
efforts to provide nurse-midwives in our rural region where healthcare 
access was desperately needed. Her dedicated efforts to save lives and 
protect the forest were both successful.
  The building that now serves as the Redbird Ranger Station was built 
by the Fordson Coal Company 100 years ago to house Fordson survey 
crews, engineers and draftsmen. The ``Club House, as it was known, is 
where employees would gather for meals and social activities. The 
original hand-cut wood paneling in the home was made from native maple, 
oak, walnut and American chestnut trees, and is still preserved on the 
walls today.
  Conservation efforts of the U.S. Forest Service have helped preserve 
the Daniel Boone National Forest and the incredible history of 
Kentuckys Appalachian region. It is an honor to recognize their 
diligent efforts on the 100th Anniversary of the U.S. Forest Services 
Redbird Ranger Station.