I was grateful to 
participate in CODEL McCaul for the 80th anniversary of the Battle of 
the Bulge. An inspiring speech was delivered by Brigadier General 
Andrew Saslav at the Bastogne War Museum, Belgium, on December 13, 
2024, confirming the professionalism and dedication of the American 
military freedom and democracy.

       Ladies and gentlemen, distinguished guests, friends and 
     family, the brave men and women who fought here 80 years ago, 
     and most importantly, our veterans. It is my honor and my 
     privilege to be with you here today. Its 05:30. Its the 
     16th of December 1944, the ground in the air around the men 
     and women of the 12th US Army Group begins to shake. The air 
     begins to burn. It is the start of a 90-minute barrage by 
     1,600 artillery pieces. Its the start of the last offensive 
     the Germans would launch in the Second World War. Their 
     objective of this fight was to shatter the front lines to 
     separate forces. It was to reach the vital port of Antwerp 
     and ultimately to break the alliance that had landed here in 
     June. To this end, the Nazis had assembled three veteran 
     armies. They were led by their most proven and battle-
     hardened commanders. They were offered the newest equipment 
     available and the most technologically advanced capabilities 
     the Nazis had. They were fighting their proven play. It had 
     taken them across what Europe lightning fast in 1940 and 
     standing in their way. Standing in their way were American 
     divisions that were actually brand new to the front or had 
     been pulled out of the brutal fighting in the herd and 
     forest. Each of those divisions covered an area that was over 
     twice the size we expected a division to be able to defend. 
     The numbers were simply in the Nazis favor. Any war game done 
     then, any war game done today, would have told you that they 
     had all the advantages. But what we must remember here today, 
     what this battle should always remind us of, what my 27 years 
     in uniform has taught me is that machines and tools of war 
     increase the brutality and the lethality of war, but that 
     training matters, Experience matters, heart and esprit de 
     corps are essential, and they will upend the results of any 
     war game ever done. The Battle of the Bulge had begun. The 
     Nazi army slammed into US lines, and while our men fought 
     hard under overwhelming force, those lines began to break. 
     Regiments were separated, regiments were surrounded, and the 
     allies were in trouble. At Eisenhowers headquarters, they 
     quickly realized what was happening and the gravity of the 
     consequences of this attack. First, they called for the 18th 
     Airborne Corps. It was down in bases in France after being 
     pulled off of a bitter fight in the Netherlands during 
     Operation Market Garden, the 82nd 101st Airborne were rushed 
     north. The 82nd would make its way north of here to a portion 
     of the fight where they would stop the lead elements of the 
     first SS Panzer Corps. This was not our fight alone. Field 
     monitor, Montgomerys, 21st Army Group was rushed from the 
     north, and Pattons Third Army would make a heroic and simply 
     amazing 48 hour drive to turn itself and move towards 
     Bastogne and the Battle of the Bulge, our alliance was 
     focused and it was moving towards the fight. But ladies and 
     gentlemen, this is a human endeavor. Its the story of humans 
     that made the difference here 80 years ago in the North. The 
     furthest the Nazis would get was within five commit five 
     kilometers of the Meuse river. You see there. They 
     encountered the Third Royal Tank Regiment of 30th British 
     Corps, and they encountered Sergeant Frederick Prover 
     operating a lone Firefly Sherman tank. He engaged the lead 
     elements, destroying a mark four, a half track and a German 
     fuel truck. His actions would allow the allies in the north 
     three group and counterattack the next day, ceasing the 
     Movement West Pattons Army advanced to Bastogne in it 
     private. James Hendricks, only 17 years old at the time of 
     the fourth Armored Division came under attack from two Nazi 
     88 he got out of his vehicle, and he rushed shows with his 
     rifle, forcing both of the crews of those guns to surrender. 
     In the meantime, two of his fellow soldiers were wounded. He 
     fought off those attackers, and he recovered those two 
     wounded men. The column began to move again, and a fuel truck 
     exploded after being hit. He rushed forward and pulled the 
     driver to safety and put out the flames on that driver for 
     his actions that day, Private Hendrix would earn the Medal of 
     Honor. Sergeant Lester Courts, Private Ralph Ellis and 
     Sergeant George Carroll were all separated from their units 
     during the fight. They would survive the battle of the bulge. 
     They survived because the heroic actions of French, Belgian, 
     and Luxembourg citizens who came to the raid, Marician and 
     Elise Goble, Louis Stein, Martz and Mr. and Mrs. Jean, 
     Pereira, and Baltashier. They hid, they cared for, and 
     eventually returned these soldiers to friendly lines, all at 
     great personal risk. This fight was about people. It is 
     people that make up our alliances. It is the soldiers and the 
     citizens that we came here to liberate, that all came 
     together in the cause of freedom. But today, ladies and 
     gentlemen, we stand in Bastogne, the landing ground of the 
     troopers of the 100 and first airborne. They were offered the 
     simplest instructions for their mission, hold the vital 
     crossroads and dont let that stone be taken. They arrived 
     here not by not by parachute, as theyd arrived at every 
     battle before Europe. But they arrived here by truck. But 
     they arrived with the same determination that they had been 
     at Normandy, the same fighting spirit that had carried them 
     into the Netherlands in the face of overwhelming German 
     forces, they accomplished their mission. The siege of 
     Bastogne pitted these high these lightly armed paratroopers 
     against the armored might of the 47th Panzer Corps. But

     war is a human endeavor, and while the Nazis had lots of 
     armor, the troopers of the 101st had a rendezvous with 
     destiny. Now most of history will tell you that that siege 
     was eventually broken on the 26th of December, at 1650 hours 
     as Cobra King, the lead tank of Pattons Third Army reached 
     Bastogne. I think the troopers of the 101st would tell you 
     that the only thing those tanks allowed him to do was 
     continue the attack. War is a human endeavor. It was then, 
     and it is now. What the world witnessed 80 years ago is what 
     happens when the cause of freedom is led by valiant action, a 
     coalition and Alliance built on freedom and liberty, not 
     conquest. In the words of General Dwight D. Eisenhower, the 
     Battle of the Bulge was a great and glorious victory. But it 
     is also a reminder that freedom is not free, that the price 
     of freedom is paid in the blood and the sweat of those that 
     defend it. Today, we are joined here today by veterans of 
     that fight from 80 years ago. And gentlemen, it is my great 
     honor to be in your presence. Thank you. Your legacy is what 
     makes our Army great today. Thank you.
inspiring remarks were 
presented by Major General Peter Andrysiak EUCOM Chief of Staff on 
December 14, 2024, for the Commemoration of the 80th Anniversary of the 
Battle of the Bulge at Luxembourg American Cemetery. Americans are 
grateful for the proven competence of the American military.
       Good morning, Grand Duke Henri, Grand Duchess, King 
     Philippe, Queen Mathilde, Prime Minister Frieden, Speaker 
     Claude Wiseler, President Roberta Metsola of the European 
     Parliament, Prime Minister Alexander de Croo, Ambassador 
     Nelson, Secretary Djou, honorable Members of Congress, 
     Ambassador Thomas Barrett, Commissioner Matthew Jones, 
     distinguished guests, allies and partners, and most 
     importantly, to our honored veterans that are with us here 
     today, welcome today this sacred place we gather to honor the 
     legacy of those who fought in the Battle of the Bulge. And 
     its a privilege to stand here among you in this solemn 80th 
     anniversary, a moment to reflect on the courage and sacrifice 
     that secured freedom that we cherish today. 80 years ago, in 
     the depths of the Ardennes winter on the ground that we stand 
     on, bore witness to extraordinary courage and unimaginable 
     sacrifice. Young soldiers faced not only a relentless enemy 
     fire, but also the freezing temperatures and the snow-covered 
     terrain against the possible odds, they stood firm, not just 
     for their own countries, but for the liberty of millions. 
     Their fight was for something greater, a vision of a Free 
     Europe and a better future. And so today was we commemorate 
     their bravery, we reaffirm our gratitude for their sacrifice 
     and the unity that made victory possible. For me, this 
     commemoration is profoundly personal. My parents, like many 
     millions in Europe, endured unimaginable horrors of World War 
     Two. My father, orphaned by the Nazi tyranny when his mother 
     was put in prison, was liberated by the Allied Forces who 
     fought here in the Ardennes. His father, a man I never knew, 
     perished in a concentration camp. My mother and her family 
     were forced out of the Sudetenland and into forced labor 
     camps and eventually granted refugee status in Germany. But 
     the journey was a grueling one, and her father never survived 
     it. Another man that I never had the opportunity to know. So 
     these tragedies, like so many others, were the reality of 
     life under the oppression during the war, yet their 
     liberation and the liberation of millions came at the hands 
     of Allied soldiers that we honor here today. Their courage 
     gave my parents and countless others a second chance. They 
     made it possible for me to be standing here in front of you 
     today. Millions endured similar struggles, and millions owned 
     their liberation to the soldiers who fought here. Their 
     courage changed the course of history, not just for families 
     like mine, but for entire nations. The Battle of the Bulge 
     tested allied resolved under extreme conditions, and in 
     December of 1944 the German Army launched a massive surprise 
     offensive through the Ardennes, creating the infamous Bulge 
     of the Allied front lines. Nowhere was this more evident than 
     at Bastogne, where Brigadier General Anthony McAuliffe in the 
     101st Division held the line against overwhelming odds, 
     encircled and under siege. McAuliffe and his men faced 
     relentless attacks under freezing conditions, and when the 
     Germans demanded surrender, everybody knows the story that 
     McAuliffe his famous statement ``Nuts! the Defiance became 
     a rallying cry for the beleaguered defenders and a symbol of 
     American and Allied determination and victory at Bastogne was 
     marked by a turning point in the battle. It was the end of 
     any German offensive, but it came at a high cost. Over 75,000 
     were killed, wounded or captured, but their sacrifice endured 
     that the march toward liberation would continue. The people 
     of Luxembourg endured the occupation, suffering and loss 
     during the war, yet they also witnessed liberation brought by 
     Allied forces who risked and gave their lives in these very 
     fields. Luxembourg has shown remarkable dedication to 
     honoring those who fell here and through the care of this 
     Cemetery and others like it, you remind us of the enduring 
     bond forged between the nations in the crucible of war. And 
     your commitment endures with your with you being your 
     presence here, as these sacrifices are never forgotten. Ive 
     had the good opportunity and good fortune to be at a number 
     of the American Battle Monuments, cemeteries, and Im always 
     in awe of their splendor? Theyre pristine. Theyre powerful, 
     you know. And as we stand here, as you look behind me, 5,076 
     headstones, both Latin Crosses and Stars of David, were 
     reminded of the extraordinary courage and the sacrifice of 
     those who rest here, farmers, factory workers, teachers, 
     students, fathers, brothers, sons and sisters and daughters, 
     and they came from all walks of life, all races, and united 
     for a common cause, the defense of freedom. Each marker is 
     perfectly aligned and oriented westward toward home, a 
     poignant remember of the enduring connection that these 
     heroes shared with the nation that they fought to protect, 
     even in eternal rest, they faced the families who awaited 
     their return but never got to see them again. The Wall of the 
     Missing on both sides of the tent consists of two walls 
     inscribed with the names of 371 service members whose remains 
     were never recovered. And these walls standing in solemn 
     symmetry symbolize the connection between those who fought 
     and those who remain to honor their sacrifice. And then, 
     though their bodies are absent, their memory endures as a 
     testament to the cost of liberty. And at the center, right, 
     or back here behind us stands the small chapel, a place for 
     reflection and reverence, and the description in their reads 
     their name liveth forevermore. These words serve as a solemn 
     promise that the sacrifices for those who rest here will 
     never be forgotten. This Cemetery and its pristine grounds 
     are solemn and solid markers telling their story. We spare no 
     expense to honor those who perished, providing them with a 
     final resting place fitting of their sacrifice, a place that 
     reflects the magnitude and courage the debt we owe to their 
     memory. And so this sacred place ensures that their 
     sacrifices will be remembered, not just by those that are 
     gathered here today, but by the generations to come. The 
     sacrifices of those who rest here are not relics of history. 
     They are the foundation for the present and the future. NATO 
     built on the unity and determination shown during these 
     battles like The Ardennes remains a cornerstone of peace and 
     security, and then today, NATOs commitment to collective 
     defense and shared values is a shining city on a hill to 
     deter aggression and to uphold freedom secured by these brave 
     men and women. The courage and resolve of these soldiers 
     inspire us all, and still, they challenge us to live up to 
     their legacy by protecting the values they fought for, 
     liberty, unity and dignity for all. Ill close with a quote 
     from President Roosevelt. The light of their sacrifice shall 
     not grow dim with the passing years, let us ensure that their 
     gift of liberty endures for generations. So let us honor 
     their legacy, not only with our words but our actions. Let us 
     strive to live lives worthy of their sacrifice by protecting 
     the freedoms they fought for, fostering unity amongst nations 
     and standing resolute against tyranny in all of its forms. So 
     May their bravery continue to inspire us, may their memory 
     forever guide us toward a better world, Thank you.
I rise today to recognize my constituent and 
friend Dr. Rachel Hardeman for her extraordinary antiracist 
scholarship.
  Dr. Hardeman is the founding director of the Center for Antiracism 
Research for Health Equity (CARHE), and the Blue Cross Endowed 
Professor of Health and Racial Equity in the Division of Health Policy 
&amp; Management at the University of Minnesota School of Public Health. 
Her tremendous work at the Center led to her being named one of TIMEs 
100 most influential people in the world this year.
  Led by Dr. Hardeman, the team of researchers at CARHE has garnered 
national and international attention for their research on structural 
racism in healthcare. TIME specifically recognized Dr. Hardemans work 
to address Americas maternal health crisis, which has focused on 
disparate birthing outcomes across race and how police brutality can 
impact pregnancy and childbirth. Dr. Hardeman is committed to lending 
her expertise to shape policy that will positively impact our 
communities for generations to come, including Minnesotas 
groundbreaking Dignity in Pregnancy and Childbirth Act and the federal 
Momnibus Bill.
  Dr. Hardeman has always placed community at the forefront of her 
work, and consistently partners with stakeholders to better inform her 
research. A prime example is her long-standing partnership with the 
Black-owned Roots Community Birthing Center in North Minneapolis which 
has been instrumental in her research to demonstrate a culturally-
centered approach to birth equity that can help address the maternal 
health crisis we are facing.
  This honor from TIME is indicative of Dr. Hardemans dedication to 
working closely with community to produce results that are relevant not 
just locally, but around the country and the world. We are very 
fortunate to have such a brilliant, diligent, and thoughtful leader in 
Minnesotas Fifth Congressional District whose work has, and 
undoubtedly will continue to, lead to better health outcomes in 
Minnesota and beyond.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in congratulating Dr. 
Hardeman for this recognition and share our gratitude for her 
invaluable contributions to the fields of health and racial equity.
I was grateful to 
participate in CODEL McCaul for the 80th Anniversary of the Battle of 
the Bulge. A highlight of the ceremonies at the Bastogne War Museum in 
Belgium was a speech by Chairman Michael McCaul of the House Foreign 
Affairs Committee, on December 13, 2024. As Chairman McCaul completes 
his impressive service as Committee Chairman, his sincere presentation 
will always be historically appreciated.
       Thank you. Its truly an honor to be here today, but also 
     to be the presence of our veterans of Battle the Bulge. 
     Youre truly heroes, and I thank you for being here today. 
     Today we gather to honor and remember the valor and sacrifice 
     of the men who fought the bitter cold of December 1944 and 
     changed the course of history, the freedoms that we enjoy 
     today were born out of this bloody battle, which Winston 
     Churchill described as undoubtedly the greatest American 
     battle of the war 80 years ago in the Ardennes Forest of 
     Belgium, Luxembourg, and Germany. The Battle of the Bulge 
     began a desperate and brutal offensive by Nazi forces that 
     tested the resolve of the Allied troops, while the U.S. and 
     allied forces faced tremendous challenges against a well-
     equipped and well-trained enemy. The American troops did what 
     they do best. They stood up to the challenge and held the 
     line. This was also my fathers war. I cannot stand here 
     today without thinking about him. James McCaul, the veteran 
     of the European theater. He served as a bombardier on a B 17, 
     known as a Flying Fortresses, participating in 32 bombing 
     missions on enemy targets, including this one right here 
     today, he was part of the largest bombing mission in U.S. 
     history, in support of the D Day invasion in Normandy, as 
     well as the skies above us during the Battle of the Bulge. He 
     was and is always my hero, as are you, and so too are all 
     those who bravely liberated a continent and defeated evil 
     their commitment to victory at all cost, exemplified the grit 
     and defiance of the American spirit. It was here in the 
     frozen forest that the world witnesses strength and unity and 
     resolve soldiers like the men of the 101st Airborne who held 
     the line in Bastogne, despite being surrounded and 
     outnumbered, they refused to surrender. They understood the 
     stakes that were happening right here, aside from the death 
     and carnage from the battle, American troops faced one of the 
     coldest winters in recorded history, with record breaking 
     temperatures sinking as low as negative 18 degrees 
     Fahrenheit, trench foot, frostbite, arctic conditions were 
     just as deadly as Hitlers army. Supply lines were stretched 
     thin. Troops were exhausted from constant combat as they 
     advanced across Europe, closing in on Berlin, the battle 
     spanned six weeks and had staggering costs, 80,000 
     casualties, nearly 20,000 killed Americans and 20,000 taken 
     prisoner, and the SS did not abide by the Geneva Convention, 
     all told; half a million Americans, along with over half a 
     million Allied troops, fought in this battle. It was the 
     bloodiest battle for U.S. forces during the entirety of World 
     War Two. The Allied Victory here broke the back of the Nazi 
     war machine and paved the way for liberation of Europe. The 
     memory of this battle should reinforce the moral clarity to 
     defend freedom at all costs. My fathers generation, your 
     generation, fought to eradicate evil, and we must never 
     forget their sacrifices and continue the legacy of freedom 
     that they handed down to us, to my children and to our 
     grandchildren. As a Texan, Im also proud that many heroes of 
     this battle went to Texas A&amp;M University, which I represent, 
     including then Colonel James Earl Rudder. He was a 
     distinguished Texas A&amp;M alumnus who was a commanding officer 
     of the Armys Second Ranger Battalion. He was one of the 
     amazing soldiers who landed at

     Omaha Beach, and stormed Pointe du Hoc, scaling 100-foot 
     cliffs, neutralizing the German guns above. He continued his 
     mission across Europe, fighting in this very battle, the 
     Battle of the Bulge. And the relevance of this Battle is just 
     as important today as it was 80 years ago. History can repeat 
     itself once again. We are witnessing the largest land 
     invasion in Europe since 1939 with Russian aggression in 
     Ukraine and Eastern Europe. We are also witnessing the rise 
     of Chairman Xi in China and the Ayatollah in Iran is also 
     rearing his ugly head. We are witnessing a world on fire and 
     a battle again between good and evil. The significance of 
     this battle must serve as a reminder that Freedom is Never 
     Free. In that the democracies around the world must rally to 
     the cause of freedom when it is under attack. We do not 
     choose our enemies. They choose us. And just as we fought the 
     Nazis during World War Two, we will continue to fight for 
     freedom and democracy. It is our duty to take the lessons 
     learned from our fathers, grandfathers in history, to 
     preserve what these men fought for. In a time of great peril, 
     these men fought against tyranny and oppression, to preserve 
     freedom. History will always remember them as the greatest 
     generation, may God bless our veterans, the fallen heroes of 
     the Battle of the Bulge, the great people of Bastogne, and 
     the United States of America, and may He hold them in the 
     palm of his hand. Thank you.
I rise today to commemorate and celebrate 
the twentieth anniversary of the Matthews-Vu Medical Group in Colorado 
Springs, led by Doctor Richard Vu and his wife Doctor Shabnum Matthews-
Vu. The Matthews-Vu Medical Group has served the Pikes Peak region with 
a focus on the underserved in our community, offering many low-cost 
medical solutions for those most vulnerable.
  Dr. Vu was born in Vietnam and moved to the United States as a young 
boy with his mother and siblings, living in Chicago near his father. 
The circumstances of his upbringing instilled in him a hard wark ethic 
and desire to serve those around him who are underserved, especially 
those on welfare and receiving govemmental aide.
  Dr. Vu and Dr. Matthews-Vu, who grew up in East Meadows, New York, 
met at Northwestern University Medical School in Chicago, where they 
both received their medical degrees. Dr. Vu completed his residency in 
Internal Medicine at Rush-Presbyterian-St. Lukes Medical Center in 
Chicago, while Dr. Matthews-Vu completed her residency in Pediatrics at 
the University of Chicago. After residency, the couple first lived in 
Arizona and then moved to Colorado Springs in 2004 with their family, 
they began their medical practice shortly after the move.
  Originally founded with only two and a half physicians and a small 
and modest office in 2004, the Matthews-Vu Medical Group has grown to 
over sixty providers in five locations with a broad range of 
specialties and medical skills. Specializing in serving our community 
and patients who are on government plans such as Medicare, Medicaid, 
and Tricare, the Matthews-Vu Medical Group has become a beacon of help 
for those in our community who need affordable medical care that is 
provided with an intentionally caring and loving heart.

  This commitment to the individual and family of every patient is 
evident in the way both Dr. Vu and Dr. Matthews-Vu live their lives and 
have raised their family. The love they share for each other and their 
family is obvious in the way they interact with each other and every 
patient. They are most attentive to their patients and prioritize their 
needs above everything else. Their passion for medical excellence and 
patient service is driven by their mission statement: ``Providing the 
highest quality of compassionate care for patients from all walks of 
life. Dr. Vu and his team ensure that everyone who walks through 
their door, regardless of their background or financial means, will get 
the medical care they need and deserve.
  In 2020 the Matthews-Vu Medical Group opened their own processing 
center to process COVID-19 tests, prioritizing speed, accuracy, and 
service to our community in the midst of the pandemic. Their processing 
center allowed many other businesses in the community, including 
medical and dental, to remain open during the pandemic.
  Dr. Vu and Dr. Matthews-Vu have three children. Their family 
continues to exemplify the love of Jesus Christ to everyone around 
them. Mr. Speaker, I ask that my colleagues in Congress join me in 
honoring and celebrating the Matthews-Vu Medical Group and Dr. Richard 
Vu and Dr. Shabnum Matthews-Vu for their dedicated and Christ honoring 
service to the Pikes Peak region.
it is my honor to recognize Bradford Fitch 
for his 17 years of service to the Congressional Management Foundation 
(CMF).
  As most of my colleagues are well aware, CMF has played a vital role 
over the last five decades in supporting Congressional offices 
continuous efforts to improve their staff management skills and 
function as high-performing teams. Through individual and group 
training, informative publications and events that highlight best 
practices in management and constituent service, CMF has been 
instrumental in helping Members and staff fulfill their 
responsibilities to their country, state and district.
  Brad first joined CMF in 2001 as Deputy Director and returned to lead 
the organization as CEO in 2010. Prior to joining CMF, Brad spent the 
early years of his notable career as a congressional aide, journalist, 
consultant, college instructor, internet entrepreneur, and writer.
  Brad has served Congress in a variety of roles throughout his 
professional life and is well-known and regarded in Washington. Those 
who know Brad wont be surprised to learn he began his career out of 
school as a radio and television reporter. His compelling speech and 
engaging personality have been cornerstones to his success.
  In 1988, when Brad began on Capitol Hill, he worked for four members 
of Congress in a variety of positions, including press secretary, 
campaign manager, legislative director and chief of staff. It was 
during this period that it became clear that Brad was a passionate 
advocate for the institution of Congress as well as the members and 
their dedicated staff.
  This year is the 40th Anniversary of CMFs consequential book--
Setting Course: A Congressional Management Guide. This book has been 
extremely influential in how Congressional offices are run today and we 
applaud Brads significant role in its many updates and biennial 
distribution for over half of its existence.
  In 2002, during a period of rapid--but uneven--shift of Congressional 
office communication to the internet, Brad initiated the Gold Mouse 
Awards to recognize the best congressional websites and share their 
best practices for communicating with, and providing services

to, constituents. The research and analysis that CMF performed for the 
Gold Mouse Awards identified the most innovative and effective web page 
practices and then shared that critical information with all 
Congressional offices so they could benefit everyone.
  In 2018, Brads vision for establishing an ``Academy Awards for 
Congress provided the spark for the creation of CMFs Democracy Awards 
program. The Democracy Awards, in a similar approach to the Gold Mouse 
Awards before them, are presented to both staff and members to 
acknowledge their exemplary use of best management practices, 
constituent services and transparency. By shining a spotlight on these 
leaders, the awards showcase their skills and practices for others to 
utilize and improve on.
  Through his tenure at CMF, Brad has carefully stewarded its strong 
reputation for nonpartisan work strengthening the management skills and 
workplace practices in Congress while building public understanding and 
trust in the legislative branch. Brad has been a lifelong advocate for 
the institution of Congress, members, and staff and we thank him for 
his dedication and work on our behalf.
I rise today, along with Representative 
Mike Thompson to recognize and honor Erin Hannigan on the occasion of 
her retirement after an illustrious career of public service, 
leadership, and commitment to the Vallejo, Solano County communities 
and beyond. Erin is a lifelong resident of Solano County and a proud 
member of the Vallejo community. Her dedication and service have left a 
profound and lasting impact on those around her.
  Throughout her career, Erin held numerous significant roles that 
enriched her community. Her journey in public service began as a member 
of the Vallejo Community Development Commission, where she played a key 
role in distributing Community Development Block Grant funds to benefit 
neighborhoods and organizations in Vallejo. In 2004, she facilitated 
the relocation of a national insurance companys call center to the 
Vallejo Waterfront, creating 220 local jobs.
  In 2007, Erin was elected to the Vallejo City Council, where she 
guided the city through challenging economic times with resilience and 
a balanced approach to addressing budget deficits. She championed 
critical initiatives to improve quality of life, including revising 
commercial truck routes, introducing the Chronic Nuisance Ordinance, 
and supporting smoke-free city parks.
  Erins commitment to public service continued when she was elected to 
the Solano County Board of Supervisors, representing District 1 in 
November 2012. Sworn into office in January 2013, Supervisor Hannigan 
worked tirelessly to bridge the services and operations of the County 
with the community. Her leadership focused on public safety, 
homelessness, human trafficking, health care, and environmental 
sustainability.
  One of Erins hallmark achievements is her partnership with the Yocha 
Dehe Wintun Nation, which has contributed an extraordinary $7.75 
million over eight years to assist those in need in Solano County. This 
partnership has supported a robust collection of programs, including 
First 5 Solano, which provides critical basic needs support to families 
in crisis and funds initiatives in early learning, school readiness, 
social engagement, and community resource information at the First 5 
Center in Vallejo.
  Erin Hannigans legacy is one of integrity, leadership, and dedicated 
service to her community. Her tireless efforts and unwavering 
commitment have left an indelible mark on Solano County and serve as an 
enduring inspiration to all who had the privilege of working with her 
or benefiting from her advocacy.
  Erins leadership and contributions will be deeply missed, but she 
will undoubtedly continue to inspire those who follow in her footsteps. 
On behalf of the constituents of Californias 4th and 8th Congressional 
Districts, we wish Erin best wishes in her well-earned retirement and 
extend our sincere gratitude for her many years of service to the 
community.
I rise today to congratulate the 
members of the Maury High School Football Team from Norfolk, Virginia, 
on claiming their second straight Class 5 State Championship, and their 
first back-to-back state crown in program history.
  On Saturday, December 14, 2024, the Maury Commodores won the 
championship game against the Briar Woods High School Falcons of 
Loudoun County by a score of 46-0. Led by Coach Dyrri McCain, the 
Commodores closed their season undefeated, recording 15 wins, including 
six shutouts, and maintained a 30-game winning streak extending back to 
last season.
  Going into the championship, Maury faced a significant disadvantage 
after losing one of their star players in their previous game. Ari 
Watford, a defensive end committed to Clemson University, suffered a 
season ending injury in the semifinal game against Green Run High 
School on December 7. Without Watford, the team realized they would 
need to step up to win the state championship and did.
  Throughout the championship game, the Commodores led on offense. 
Quarterback AuTori Newkirk scored on the first drive of the game with 
a 49-yard touchdown pass to receiver Lebron Bond. In the second 
quarter, Newkirk passed to receiver Jahvon Wiggins, who ran the ball 
into the end zone for another touchdown and widened the Commodores 
lead to 14-0 at halftime. In the third quarter, they scored 32 points 
in less than seven minutes. Newkirk threw four touchdown passes to 
Elijah Moss, Tayshawn Branche, Damon McDaniel, and another to Bond. 
These young athletes made everyone in the community proud and 
demonstrated their ability to overcome adversity.
, in closing, I want to congratulate the Maury High School 
Football Team and thank Coach McCain, the parents, and the entire Maury 
High School community for supporting these students throughout this 
remarkable season. I wish them the best in their future endeavors, and 
I wish the program continued success.
World War II veteran, John 
Foy, provided extraordinary remarks on December 14, 2024, for the 
Commemoration of the 80th Anniversary of the Battle of the Bulge at 
Luxembourg American Cemetery. His humble insight and determination will 
forever be an inspiration for freedom and democracy as recognized by 
the late Army Pfc. Thomas Caughman of Lexington, South Carolina, that 
``Freedom isnt Free.

       Im a little short, Ladies and gentlemen, Your Majesties, 
     distinguished guests, and especially fellow veterans. 80 
     years ago, we stood in these frozen forests young men facing 
     an unrelenting enemy and the harshest of winters, it actually 
     get down to below zero at times. The Battle of the Bulge was 
     not just a test of strategy, but of spirit, determination and 
     sacrifice. I remember the bitter cold, the weight of my 
     machine gun and the faces of my brothers in arms, ordinary 
     men who displayed extraordinary courage. Together, we fought 
     for freedom, step by painful step through snow and enemy 
     fire. Some of these faces I still can see frozen in time, 
     they were sons, fathers, friends, who gave everything so that 
     others might live. The Ardennes offensive was a turning 
     point, not just in the time of war, but in our lives. It 
     taught us the value of resilience, unity, sacrifice. Today, 
     we honor those who did not return, whose lives ended here, 
     ensuring that turns that tyranny would not prevail. To my 
     fellow veterans, thank you for your service, to the families 
     of the fallen, their sacrifices not forgotten, and to those 
     who come after us, may you always remember that the freedoms 
     we cherish came at a terrible cost. Let us remember of this 
     Battle inspired us to work for a world where such sacrifices 
     are no longer needed. Im a small man, but I was a tiger back 
     then, that I had a strong faith in God and in my Catholic 
     faith certainly helped, although much of what we did was 
     completely alien to those teachings, the killing was the 
     worst. Almost every day, one or more of us would be killed or 
     wounded, and every day, we would kill German soldiers. After 
     a while, we came almost numb to such a thing. Purple Hearts 
     were earned by the thousands. The bleeding wounds of 69,000 
     young Americans stained the snow and left that Red Badge of 
     Courage on that blood-soaked field of battle. The American 
     army had 90,000 casualties, about 19,000 of that were killed 
     in action, 20,000 taken prisoners and about 50,000 wounded. 
     My company was badly decimated, down to about 50 men left 
     from 200. My machine gun section of 12 men had five killed 
     and three badly wounded. They were my friends. This country 
     was truly blessed. The Ardennes Woods are silent now. The 
     battle smoke has fled. 80 years have passed. Now only 
     memories and the dead. Thank you. May God bless you. Thank 
     you.
I take this opportunity today 
to highlight the deep, widespread and heartfelt appreciation shared by 
many across Ocean County, New Jersey for their extraordinary County 
Clerk, Scott Colabella, who will retire at the end of this month after 
a lifetime of outstanding public service to our New Jersey communities.
  Scott is a great American patriot. His story of commitment, 
dedication and outstanding work on behalf of New Jersey citizens--and 
his leadership in securing foolproof, reliable elections--belongs in 
our Nations congressional record, the official written history of this 
country since the Continental Congress.
  I first met Scott in the early days of my campaigns and congressional 
service. In fact, Scott was among one of my first congressional interns 
in my freshman term in the 97th Congress in 1981. Serving in my 
Washington, D.C. office, Scott proved to be an outstanding worker, 
assisting me in the delivery of top-notch constituent service and 
legislative analysis.
  After working on Capitol Hill and graduating from Rider University 
with a Bachelor of Arts degree in political science, Scott began a 
career of public service rewarded with promotions, achievements and 
advancement over the course of the next several decades.

  His first stop was an eight-year stretch serving in Governor Tom 
Keans Constituent Service Office and the New Jersey Division of Motor 
Vehicles. Thereafter, for many years, Scott served as the Executive 
Director of the Ocean County Republican Organization and ultimately, he 
became the Deputy County Clerk, of Ocean County in January 2004.
  As Deputy Clerk, Scott proved his muscle and helped build a program 
based on a deep understanding of New Jersey election law and its 
equitable, just application. As such, the people of Ocean County 
recognized his talents and resoundingly elected him to serve as County 
Clerk in 2010.
  Since 2010, Scott was elected by wide margins three consecutive 
times--a public affirmation and reward for his steady and exemplary 
service as a State Constitutional Officer.
  When he took the helm as County Clerk, the office had a reputation as 
a well-run organization, but Scott still worked to find new ways to 
expand its reach and make it even better. Under his watch, the office 
processed millions of vote-by-mail applications and ballots and 
millions more sample ballots. Scott also directed the processing of 
countless trade names, passports, notary public oaths and veterans 
cards.
  During his tenure, Scott successfully launched the Property Alert 
Service to empower the public to monitor any changes made to their 
property records. He modernized election software to enable the public 
to monitor election results in real time on the Clerks website, and he 
upgraded the electronic e-records system to attain paperless recording 
of over 70 percent of all mortgages and land deeds and other documents.
  During the COVID-19 pandemic, Scott met and stayed ahead of the 
extreme challenges facing county clerks across the state--and he helped 
lead the way. When voters in 2020 were required under state law to use 
only vote-by-mail ballots, for the first time ever, he met the task, 
secured the trust of the voters and achieved a successful election 
process.
  A longtime resident of the Borough of Barnegat Light on Long Beach 
Island, Ocean County, New Jersey, Scott is moving on to the next 
chapter of his life.
  He will be greatly missed by me and thousands of my fellow Ocean 
County residents, who have taken great confidence and comfort in 
knowing Scott Colabella was at the helm, securing free and fair 
elections in Ocean County.
  We thank Scott for his unparallelled public service. May God bless my 
friend, and bring him added success and great luck in the years ahead.
on December 13, 2024, 
during the commemoration of the 80th Anniversary of the Battle of the 
Bulge, hosted by the American Battle Monuments Commission (ABMC) and 
the U.S. Embassy in Belgium, inspiring remarks were presented by 
Belgian Foreign Minister, Bernard Quentin. The alliance of Belgium and 
the United States is unshakeable.

       Dear Senator, Bill Nelson NASA Administrator and 
     Representative of His Excellency, the President of the United 
     States of America, Ambassador Michael Adler, and members of 
     the official U.S. delegation, including, of course, very 
     specially, the veterans and their families and carers. It is 
     a true honor to stand in front of you here in Bastogne, 
     ambassadors and other security distinguished guests present 
     tonight. Dear Mr. Benoit Lutgen, Mayor of Bastogne, ladies 
     and gentlemen, dear friends, the nuts that will be thrown 
     tomorrow in homage to General Anthony McAuliffe, the GIs 
     elements in which you might drink a delicious local beer in a 
     Bastogne Cafe later tonight, carefully the last resting place 
     of General George Patton just across the border. Not many 
     battles in history have generated emotions and symbols as 
     strong as those related to the Battle of the Bulge for many 
     generations, this Battle is synonymous with courage, 
     resilience and self-sacrifice. It is a powerful symbol of 
     unity and resistance of democratic countries against tyranny 
     and violence, it is also a potent reminder that peace and 
     freedom come at a price, as we honor the memory of so many 
     young soldiers from all over the U.S. and other allied 
     countries who fell for the freedom of Europe. How can we not 
     think of the Ukrainian soldiers who are today dying in the 
     snow, in the frozen mud to defend their country against an 
     unprovoked war of aggression? Tonight, ceremonies remind us 
     of the importance to stand side by side in the fight for the 
     rightful cause. It reminds us of our duty to support Ukraine 
     for as long as it takes, because, as we saw here in Bastogne, 
     the violence and brutality should never prevail, ladies and 
     gentlemen, not taking anything away from the tribute we owe 
     to the British and Canadian soldiers who also fought and died 
     in the larger theater operation, including your own Brigadier 
     men, nor the Free Poles, Free French, and also all those 
     coming from all over the world, including India and Africa. 
     Looking at the names on the graves, on the Ardennes Forest, 
     this is essentially an American history and a tragic and 
     glorious epitome of Americas unflinching dedication to 
     preserving liberty, democracy and human rights in the world. 
     We are here, first and foremost, to honor freedom and do 
     tribute to troops from all corners of the U.S. who came here 
     to liberate our land, my land, from the yoke of Nazism 
     thousands of miles from their own cities and villages. We 
     celebrate them, those who are with us today, the others who 
     could enjoy and the children, nieces, nephews, grandchildren 
     and grand grandchildren of those who are not with us any 
     longer. We are also here to give a strong message of hope and 
     unity, both as a minister and as a historian. I know that the 
     United States of America and Belgium share a long history 
     during which they have consistently defended together the 
     values of humanity and freedoms that both our nations are 
     built upon. One moving story I remember was told in a great 
     documentary series in the battle that was broadcasted in on 
     Belgium television when I was still a child, already a long 
     time ago, the story of young servicemen from the Midwest who, 
     during the battle, were trying to communicate with local 
     villagers despite not speaking any French. Soon, they 
     discovered that the dialect they were speaking back in 
     Wisconsin or Minnesota was actually a Walloon, one perfectly 
     understandable to the Bastogne they were addressing. Like 
     them, hundreds of thousands of Americans claim Belgian 
     lineage today. Thousands of viewers and Belgian citizens live 
     in the other country, with hundreds of thousands more 
     employed by investors from the other country and countless 
     tourist researchers. And students, sports, people and artists 
     traveling each year across the Atlantic Ocean. These are deep 
     and enduring bonds. Allies yesterday are allies today, and it 
     is only by remaining trustful security partners that we will 
     be able to tackle the current global challenges, a nature of 
     safety and prosperity. Belgiums commitment to the 
     Transatlantic Partnership is a tenet of its foreign policy, 
     as is our result, to strive for peace in Europe, in Africa 
     and, of course, in East Asia and the Middle East. Allies were 
     also in many other combats with us. One example among many, 
     the fight against criminal activities, including narcotics 
     and the modern slavery of peoples of people smuggling, 
     increasingly cooperating, both at home and in third 
     countries. We need to enhance our common fight, because these 
     threats are numerous, challenging our freedom and our 
     democracies worldwide. Ladies and gentlemen, dear friends, we 
     are those future generations for which the young GIs, 
     paratroopers, gunners and Rangers fought 80 years ago. Let us 
     show ourselves worthy of those who gave their lives for us, 
     and let us continue the strong tradition of mutual trust and 
     friendship that has existed for close to two centuries, and 
     even more so since World War Two and the Battle of the Bulge, 
     it is now our duty to preserve the freedom that has been 
     bestowed on us and to pass it on to todays fellow 
     generation. And if you allow me, dear veterans, when I saw 
     you, I had to remember a personal event late in the 90s. I 
     was sitting watching the news with my beloved late 
     grandmother, born before the First World War. It was a war in 
     Serbia, and she was crying, and I dont remember. I dont 
     want to remember the stupidity I told her, so why are you 
     crying? And she looked at me back, and she loved me a lot, 
     but there Her eyes were not happy, and she told me, I knew. 
     What do you know about war? Nothing, But you know and you 
     give to all of us. The best of you. Thank you very much.
the Commemoration of the 
80th Anniversary of the Battle of the Bulge, hosted by the American 
Battle Monuments Commission (ABMC) and U.S. Embassy Belgium, on 
December 13, 2024, at the Mardasson Memorial featured remarks by 
Senator Jerry Moran. Heartfelt observations by a fellow son of a 
Kansas, same as Supreme Allied Commander Dwight D. Eisenhower.
       Ladies and gentlemen, and our veterans, those who served 
     here at the Battle of the Bulge and around the globe, who 
     served in World War Two and the wars that preceded that, and 
     those who serve today, its an honor to be with you here in 
     Belgium to lead this Senate Delegation to the 80th 
     anniversary of the Battle of the Bulge. And I want to 
     recognize my colleagues from the Senate who are here, Senator 
     Susan Collins, Senator John Barrasso, Senator Kristen 
     Gillibrand and Senator Maggie Hassan. I also recognize 
     Congressman and Chairman McCaul and his House members and 
     Administrator Bill Nelson in his representation of the 
     Administration of the United States of America. We thank all 
     of you who have traveled here today for this very important 
     and significant occasion. I represent the state of Kansas, 
     the home of Dwight D. Eisenhower in the United States Senate, 
     I am the ranking member and incoming Chairman of the Senate 
     Committee on Veterans Affairs. In marking this commemoration 
     in Belgium today and Luxembourg tomorrow, we are here to pay 
     tribute to and to honor the memory of the men who fought for 
     freedom on the European Continent and those who remain here, 
     still lying in internal rest in sites like Ardennes, the 
     American Cemetery to the north and Luxembourg American 
     Cemetery to the southeast. Together, they are the final 
     resting place for more than 10,000 Americans, and another 834 
     are memorialized on the wall of the missing places like these 
     and the monuments where we are today are reminders of the 
     price that were paid for the liberties that we each enjoy. 
     The Battle of the Bulge was the largest, as weve heard, the 
     most costly battle for the Americans during World War Two. On 
     the morning of December 16, 1944, under the cover of poor 
     weather, Nazi Germany launched a final offensive seeking to 
     divide allied forces and to force a negotiated end to the 
     hostilities on this Western Front. Despite being outnumbered, 
     out gunned short of supplies, it was here during the coldest 
     winter in decades, where the US Armys 101st Airborne 
     Division, The Screaming Eagles, held off the enemys advances 
     and bought time for the allies to halt and counter the last 
     gasp the surprise attack of the enemy. This Band of Brothers 
     was made up of men from every corner of the United States, 
     such as Senator Collins, Father Don Collins, Senator 
     Barrasso, Father John and Senator Hassans father, Robert 
     Wood and many more. Those of you here in attendance today who 
     have loved ones, who served, who answered the call and to 
     bear arms in this Battle of the Bulge. On December 22, 1944, 
     General Eisenhower, from that small town in Kansas called 
     Abilene, sent the following message to every member of the 
     Allied Expeditionary Force. General Eisenhower said, ``the 
     enemy is making his supreme effort. He is fighting savagely 
     to take back all that you have won, but already in this 
     battle, your gallantry has done much to foil his plans. In 
     the face of your proven bravery, your fortitude, he the enemy 
     will completely fail, but we cannot be content with just a 
     mere repulse by rushing out from his fixed defenses. The 
     enemy may have given us the chance to turn his great gamble 
     into his worst defeat. I call upon Eisenhower speaking 
     here. ``I call upon every man of the Allies to rise now to 
     new heights of courage, of resolution and of effort, united 
     in this determination and with this unshakable faith in the 
     cause for which we fight, we will, with Gods help, go 
     forward to our greatest victory. With that message in the 
     soldiers minds and hearts, the fighting continued through 
     Christmas, the soldiers huddled in their foxholes and prayed 
     between shellings, echoing the prayers of their loved ones in 
     church pews and around the dinner tables back home, as the 
     calendar turned from 1944 to 1945 the Allied Army steadily 
     drove back the enemy in a unified push toward victory. One 
     year after the war ended on Americas Independence Day, the 
     people of Belgium broke ground on this site to demonstrate 
     and to dedicate this patch of earth to the memory of the 
     heroes of the Battle of the Bulge in this center of this 
     monument, there is an inscription that, when translated into 
     English, reads the Belgium people remember their American 
     liberators, July 4, 1946, I thought of that as we drove 
     through this town and saw the Christmas ornaments, the trees, 
     the stars, the lights, what happened here 80 years ago makes 
     life possible here today and other places around our globe. 
     This Transatlantic partnership forged in war, remains a 
     pillar of strength for both of for both of our nations, 
     Belgium and the United States. And as Russia wages wages raw 
     war in Ukraine, the bonds of NATO must grow stronger and 
     continue to deter the aggression of our shared adversaries. 
     The General indicated what the Germans were trying to 
     accomplish, and I take his words to say, we too must 
     demonstrate the Alliance cannot be shattered. We will stand 
     together today, shoulder to shoulder, just as the soldiers 
     who liberated this continent did eight decades ago, 80 years 
     after the Battle of the Bulge, remember, we remember the cost 
     paid by those who died here and those who served here. Time 
     cannot time must not dim the glory of their deeds. We often 
     look for heroes, and we look in baseball parks and 
     amphitheaters and sports figures entertainers. We sometimes 
     look to politicians to be heroes, and sometimes they are. But 
     mostly we dont have to look very far for heroes. They are 
     among us, among us today in our hometowns across the United 
     States of America, they are the ones who served theres a 
     small memorial back home in Abilene, Kansas. Its a memorial 
     at the presidential library of Dwight D. Eisenhower that 
     bears this inscription. ``Let us be glad that such heroes 
     have lived and mourn those who gave the ultimate sacrifice. 
     Indeed, let us be glad for those, those heroes who have 
     lived, those heroes who show us away and let us strive to 
     live our lives in a manner worthy of their sacrifices. God 
     Bless you, veterans. Thank you for being our heroes and our 
     role models. Thank you.
I rise today to pay tribute to a trusted 
leader, a tireless champion for civil rights, and a treasured friend. 
South Carolina State Senator Kay Patterson transitioned on December 13, 
2024. His integrity, courage, and wisdom will leave an indelible mark 
on the State of South Carolina for years to come.
, South Carolina in 1931 and grew 
up in our shared hometown of Sumter. After graduating from Lincoln High 
School in 1949 and attending Claflin University, Kay joined the Marine 
Corps. After his discharge from the Corps, he returned to Claflin and 
later Allen University through the GI Bill. As a student at Allen, Kay 
cleaned offices at the South Carolina Statehouse where Black people 
were forbidden from entering in any official capacity.
  Kay graduated from Allen in 1956 and began a public-school teaching 
career at W.A. Perry Middle School in Columbia where he taught for 14 
years. When Columbia schools were integrated in 1970, Kay joined the 
South Carolina Education Association, where he worked for 15 years, in 
1974, Kay was elected to the South Carolina House of Representatives 
from House District 73 representing North Columbia. For the next 32 
years, Kay served in the building where he was once forbidden from 
entering except to clean the offices.
  As a Representative, Kay was singularly focused on being a voice for 
the voiceless. His background as a teacher made him a tireless advocate 
for public education and South Carolinas children. Eventually, he was 
selected as a member of the influential House Budget Committee. Kay was 
excited about this new opportunity, but that excitement vanished when 
I, among others, urged him to run for the State Senate in 1984. 
Reluctantly, Kay eventually agreed to my appeal, and he went on to 
serve in the State Senate for 24 years, becoming just the second Black 
member to be elected to the chamber since the Reconstruction and Jim 
Crow eras.
  In the Senate, Kay became known for his sharp wit and oratory skills. 
Though Kay didnt speak on the floor of the Senate often, when he did, 
everyone listened. He wasnt afraid to discuss difficult topics like 
race and always believed in speaking up for what he believed in. His 
courage and wisdom made him a natural leader among his colleagues, who 
elected him to Chair the South Carolina Legislative Black Caucus and 
the Richland County Legislative Delegation, and to membership on the 
University of South Carolina Board of Trustees--the first Black man to 
serve on the board in the modern era.
  Kays proudest legislative achievement was his advocacy for removing 
the Confederate flag from the South Carolina Statehouse Dome. He 
introduced his first bill calling for the flags removal in 1983 and 
eventually helped negotiate a compromise that saw the flag removed from 
the top of the dome to the statehouse grounds in 2000. When the flag 
was fully removed in 2015, it was, in no small part, due to Kays 
decades of advocacy.
  After his retirement from the South Carolina General Assembly in 
2008, Kay continued to serve his community. Kay believed that true 
leadership involved being an example to those who are destined to 
follow. Many elected officials in South Carolina have sought his 
mentorship and many have been inspired to enter public service through 
his example. A civil rights icon and champion for the poor, Kay was an 
advocate for all who couldnt advocate for themselves. He was an 
extraordinary public servant not only for his community, but for the 
entire state of South Carolina.
  I wrote in the Introduction of my Memoirs that, ``All of my 
experiences have not been pleasant, but I have considered all of them 
to be blessings. I count my experiences with Kay as some of my lifes 
greatest blessings, and he was a blessing to all who knew him. Kay will 
be sorely missed and may he rest in peace.
, I ask that you and our colleagues join me in celebrating 
the life and legacy of Senator Kay Patterson.
Americans are grateful for 
the service of American Battle Monuments Commission (ABMC) Secretary 
Charles K. Djou who provided welcome remarks of the Commemoration of 
the 80th Anniversary of the Battle of the Bulge at the Luxembourg 
American Cemetery on December 14, 2024. With his AMBC leadership, 
American cemeteries worldwide are a permanent recognition of affection 
for servicemembers recognizing Freedom Is Not Free. When Americans 
liberate nations from oppression, it is not for occupation as we 
request only to have sufficient acreage to bury valiant American 
patriots.

       Good morning, Your Majesties, Prime Ministers, 
     Administrator Nelson, Ambassador Barrett, members of the 
     United States Senate and United States House of 
     Representatives. Ladies and gentlemen, welcome to the 
     Luxembourg American Cemetery. Id like to start here this 
     morning by sharing with all of you a very quick story about 
     one soldier. His name is Alexis Sommaripa. Alexis was born in 
     Odessa, Ukraine. He went on to serve. He went on to graduate 
     from Harvard University, and when World War Two broke out, he 
     was 41 years old. But he nevertheless volunteered to serve in 
     the United States military, and because of his language 
     skills, speaking Russian, Ukrainian, German, and French. He 
     was put in the Intelligence Corps. He landed on Normandy 
     Beach and fought here at the Battle of the Bulge. He went on 
     and was assigned to the 37th Tank Battalion, Fourth Armored 
     Division, unfortunately, after the Battle of the Bulge, while 
     he was sitting at the top and commanding a tank, Alexis tank 
     was strafed by German Messerschmidt. It wounded the driver, 
     flinging him from the tank, and the tank Raj fell over on 
     Alexis. He is buried here at the Luxembourg American 
     Cemetery. He is buried a Plot E, Row 15, Grave, 65. I raise 
     the story with all of you, because all of these crosses and 
     these Stars of David that rest behind me are not movie props. 
     They are not just figures. They are the lives of real 
     Americans who gave the ultimate sacrifice in the cause of 
     freedom, and each and every one have a story as compelling as 
     Alexis. And I raise this story because Alexi was a Ukrainian-
     American, and the relevance today with the largest invasion 
     on the plains of Ukraine, unprovoked, is today steaming 
     across Europe. I know, ladies and gentlemen, that there are 
     many here in this world who question, who doubt, who wonder, 
     do places like this exist? Do ceremonies like this still have 
     relevance today? Im here to respond to you, to all who 
     question, to all who wonder, to all who doubt. Come, come 
     here to Luxembourg. Come here to the Luxembourg American 
     Cemetery. Come see these crosses and these Stars of David. 
     Come and see what true sacrifice is about. Because you see, 
     ladies and gentlemen, when the United States of America 
     stands at its best, when we are at our finest America does 
     not send its young, its brave and its finest to fight for a 
     king or

     a crown. We do not fight for a sect or denomination. We do 
     not even fight for a motherland or a fatherland, and 
     Americans most certainly never fight for conquest or plunder 
     or enslavement of another people. Instead, when America sends 
     its young, its brave and its finest to fight and yes, 
     sometimes make the ultimate sacrifice, America does it for 
     simple, humble values, the values of liberty and democracy 
     and when the job is done, when the mission is accomplished, 
     when America has taken down the dictator and stood up 
     democracy, Americans do something utterly unique in the 
     history of mankind. We go home all that America asks for in 
     return. In exchange for the sacrifice of our young, are a few 
     small plots of land to bury our dead. All of you are seated 
     here today in one of those small plots of land, and that is 
     why this place, this ceremony, is still so important. It 
     reminds us of American sacrifice, and it reminds all of the 
     autocrats and the dictators in this world, whether they be in 
     Moscow or Beijing, whether they be in Tehran or Pyongyang, 
     the autocracy may seem powerful. The dictatorship may seem 
     strong. But here this place at the Luxembourg American 
     Cemetery. We remind the world that there is nothing more 
     powerful in it than a free people willing to fight for 
     freedom. Ladies and gentlemen, May the good Lord bless each 
     and every one of you. Bless Luxembourg and the United States 
     of America. Thank you.