today, I rise to celebrate Detective Edwin 
Hugh of the Suffolk County Police Department, who has been honored with 
the 7th Annual U.S. Attorney Generals Award for Distinguished Service 
in Community Policing. This prestigious recognition highlights 
Detective Hughs outstanding contributions to community safety and his 
unwavering commitment to making Suffolk County a better place to live. 
His achievements exemplify the core values of law enforcement: 
integrity, dedication, and an unrelenting drive to protect and serve.
  Detective Hugh has proven himself to be a leader in law enforcement, 
building trust with residents and strengthening public safety across 
Suffolk County. Whether pursuing justice for victims of crime or 
engaging directly with the community to foster partnerships, Detective 
Hugh consistently goes above and beyond the call of duty. Suffolk 
County is a safer place because of Detective Hughs hard work and 
steadfast dedication to better our communities.
  His efforts to combat crime, reduce harm, and improve the lives of 
residents reflect his dedication not only to the badge he wears but 
also to the people he serves. He understands that effective policing is 
not just about enforcing laws--it is about creating an environment 
where families feel secure, businesses can thrive, and communities can 
flourish.
  On behalf of the people of Suffolk County and the 1st Congressional 
District of New York, I extend my sincere congratulations to Detective 
Edwin Hugh and my heartfelt gratitude for his exceptional service. His 
work serves as a model for law enforcement professionals across the 
country, and his contributions to Suffolk County are a source of pride 
for us all.
it is my privilege to call the attention of 
the House in recognition of the 50th anniversary of the Communities 
Organized for Public Service/Metro Alliance. Since 1974, the COPS/Metro 
Alliance has invested billions of dollars into San Antonio families and 
have fought to make the City a place where everyones voices are heard.
  Led by a West-Side native organizer named Ernesto Cortes Jr., church 
leaders across the City began to organize and work with one another to 
secure more opportunities for working class residents. They used their 
newfound voices to fight for housing for seniors, environmental 
protections, and safer streets. Members of COPS/Metro Alliance even 
began running for office, and successfully secured funding for 
libraries, parks, and public services.

  When factories and plants closed in San Antonio, they created job-
training programs and worked with businesses to bring more high-paying 
jobs to the City. In the aftermath of the COVID-19 pandemic, the COPS/
Metro Alliance founded an unprecedented education and job placement 
program called ``SA Ready to Work, offering over 28,000 San Antonio 
residents job placement, support, and retention services, and tuition 
for high school equivalency, college degrees, and industry-recognized 
certifications: the first of its kind in the Nation.
  While great strides have been made in the last few decades to make 
San Antonio a more equitable city, there is still more work to be done. 
As the Representative for Texass 35th Congressional District, I know 
that the COPS/Metro Alliance will continue its incredible legacy of 
uplifting the most disadvantaged among us, and work to create an even 
greater San Antonio.
I rise today to honor Mr. Tigran 
Gambaryan and celebrate his return home to the United States of the 
America, and to his friends and family.
, a resident of Georgia, and a 
dedicated former public servant. While on a business trip to Nigeria in 
February, he was arrested and charged with false accusations of tax 
evasion and money laundering. Tigran was detained in the notorious Kuje 
Prison for months, repeatedly denied access to medical care as his 
health deteriorated, denied basic due process rights, and otherwise 
treated inhumanely. Despite these severe hardships, Mr. Gambaryan 
displayed remarkable resilience and an unwavering determination to 
return home.
  Finally, on October 23, 2024, Nigeria dropped all fraudulent charges 
against Mr. Gambaryan, and he was able to return safely to the United 
States. I want to thank the hard work and dedication of the Department 
of State officials for the role they played to bring Mr. Gambaryan 
home. I also want to extend my deepest gratitude to my colleagues on 
the House Foreign Affairs Committee for their unwavering support and 
advocacy in urging the Nigerian government to secure his release. Most 
importantly, I want to commend Mr. Gambaryan for his courage and for 
never losing hope during this tumultuous situation.
  It is an honor to represent brave individuals like Tigran Gambaryan 
in Congress, and I celebrate his return home to his wife Yuki and their 
two young children. God bless their family.
I rise today to celebrate the retirement of 
Cindy Aubrey from Pikes Peak United Way after ten years of dedicated 
service to Colorados Fifth Congressional District. The CEO role at 
PPUW has been the culmination of a lifetime of service to her hometown. 
Cindy is known for her strong work ethic, visionary leadership, and her 
loving service of others. These qualities manifest in numerous 
capacities: as a daughter, a sister, a friend, a mentor, or a 
colleague. Cindys career and impact demonstrate the rare combination 
of utilizing her community-minded as well as an individual-focused 
approach. Cindy has exemplified putting her neighbors above herself and 
uplifting those around her in every way that she could.
  A proud Colorado native, born and raised in Colorado Springs, Cindy 
graduated from Mitchell High School. Cindy then graduated from Colorado 
State University where she was and remains a proud CSU Ram. After 
college, Cindy started her media career at Fox 21 before moving to 
KOAA, where she led the Creative Services Department and later the News 
Department. In these roles Cindy helped inform and shape our community, 
while gaining the respect of the entire community for her outstanding 
work.
  After developing a heart for the Pikes Peak region in her media 
career, Cindy continued the mission of community service by taking on 
the role of Chief Communications Officer with the City of Colorado 
Springs. It was here that she served during some of the greatest 
challenges in our regions history--the Waldo Canyon and Black Forest 
fires. Working tirelessly with first responders and other city 
officials, Cindy provided residents with vital, accurate, timely 
information, and did so with empathy and humility.
  In some ways as a culmination of her lifes mission of community 
service up to this point, Cindy took on a new endeavor with Pikes Peak 
United Way, first as the Senior Vice President of Marketing, and 
eventually, President and Chief Executive Officer. Under Cindys 
guidance Pikes Peak United Way created new initiatives and partnerships 
that expanded the organizations already extensive impact. This 
included celebrating 100 years of Pikes Peak United Way serving the 
Pikes Peak region and partnering with many other organizations to 
launch the Family Success Center, offering a broad range of services to 
empower those in need in our community.
  In addition to her leadership in the Pikes Peak region, Cindy has 
been recognized for and awarded the Colorado Springs Business Journal 
Woman of Influence award, the Public Relations Society of America Vista 
Award, the Colorado Coaches for Charity MVP award, and the Business 
Leader of the Year from the Southern Colorado Womens Chamber of 
Commerce. It is evident that Cindys impact is broad and deep in our 
community.
  Cindy and her husband Peter are parents to Liam and his wife Tori and 
now Grammy to their beautiful granddaughter, Azaela Joy. Mr. Speaker, I 
ask that my colleagues in Congress join me in congratulating her upon 
her retirement and celebrating the life and dedicated service of a true 
champion for the Pikes Peak region, Cindy Aubrey.
CONGRATULATING CONGRESSWOMAN CATHY McMORRIS RODGERS ON HER RETIREMENT 
                           of north carolina
I rise today to recognize and congratulate 
my friend and colleague, Chair of the Energy and Commerce Committee, 
Cathy McMorris Rodgers, on her retirement from the House of 
Representatives after a 20-year career representing the folks of 
Washingtons 5th congressional district.
  Ive had the pleasure of working closely with Cathy on the Energy and 
Commerce Committee for a long time and together weve been able to 
accomplish some amazing things for the American people. Ive admired 
her determination and strength to get our priorities across the finish 
line and she has never stopped working tirelessly on behalf of the 
people she was elected to serve. What I most admire about Cathy is her 
dedication to her family and the Down Syndrome community. Over the 
years Ive had the privilege of becoming friends with her son Cole, who 
has inspired me and is one of the reasons Im so passionate about 
supporting Cathys work on behalf of the Down Syndrome community. She 
has been a tireless champion for the community and left a lasting 
legacy with her accomplishments on behalf of the people who are 
differently-abled, so they can live their lives to their full potential 
with no barriers or bias or obstacles standing in their way.
  While her colleagues will miss her dearly, we wish Cathy and her 
family all the best as she begins this next chapter of her life.
, please join me in congratulating my friend Congresswoman 
Cathy McMorris Rodgers on her retirement from the House of 
Representatives after 20 years of service to the people of Washingtons 
5th congressional district.
on behalf of Arizonas 8th Congressional 
District, it is my honor to recognize Maricopa County Supervisor for 
District 4, Clint Hickman.
  Clint, a 4th-generation Arizonan, has served on the Board of 
Supervisors since March 21, 2013. He also is the Vice President of 
Sales and Marketing at Hickmans Family Farms, the largest egg producer 
in the southwest United States. Supervisor Hickmans experience running 
a business and his deep roots in the West Valley have guided his 
actions on the Board of Supervisors, leading the Counties approach to 
fiscal responsibility and effective governance. He has been a valuable 
resource to his constituents and small businesses, and helped lead the 
county through the challenging COVID-19 pandemic.
  I sincerely appreciate Clints service to the 8th Congressional 
District, Maricopa County, and Arizona.
I am honored to recognize my friend, Russell 
D. Smoldon, CEO of B3 Strategies.
  I first met Russell while serving in the Arizona State Legislature in 
2009. At the time, Russell was the manager of government relations for 
Salt River Project (SRP), a major utility and water company in Arizona.
  Russell now runs his own company and has over 35 years of public 
policy experience focused on energy, water, environmental, taxation, 
healthcare, and economic development issues.
  Russell is a respected leader in Arizona and I believe just about 
everyone knows him and likes him. He serves on the board of the Arizona 
Tax Research Association (ATRA) and on the board of CrossRoads. Russell 
has also served in leadership positions with the Western Business 
Roundtable, the Greater Phoenix Urban League, the American Legislative 
Exchange Council (ALEC), the National Conference of State Legislators 
Advisory Council on Energy, and the National Tax Partnership. He also 
served as a member of the Arizona Supreme Courts Child Support 
Guidelines and Domestic Relations Committees and the Arizona Highway 
Users Association, and has assisted numerous non-profit organizations, 
including the Arizona Trails Association.
  Russell is caring, fun-loving, funny, and knowledgeable. I have 
called on him for input on Arizona issues for many years.
  I thank Russell for his years of support and for all of the times he 
has provided me with valuable information and advice. Please know that 
I appreciate him. May God continue to Bless him and his family for 
years to come.
I regret that I missed Roll Call votes on 
December 5, 2024. Had I been present, I would have voted YEA on Roll 
Call No. 485 and YEA on Roll Call No. 486.
RECOGNIZING BRYAN MacDONALD AND HIS DEDICATED SERVICE TO THE CITY OF 
                             of california
today I rise to recognize Bryan MacDonald, 
Mayor Pro Tem of the City of Oxnard, a notable public servant whose 
unwavering dedication has left an indelible mark on our community.
  Bryans service to Oxnard began in 2008 when he was first elected to 
the City Council, and his leadership and commitment to public service 
have been steadfast throughout his tenure. He was re-elected in 2012, 
2016, and 2020, demonstrating his ongoing dedication to the citys 
growth and prosperity. In 2020, Bryan was appointed Mayor Pro Tem, a 
role that has allowed him to further influence the citys progress and 
address the needs of its residents. Prior to his time in local 
government, Bryan served for 30 years in the Oxnard Police Department, 
retiring as Assistant Chief of Police. His leadership in law 
enforcement has been a pillar of the citys public safety efforts and 
continues to serve as a lasting testament to his dedication and 
commitment to our community.
  Beyond his roles in law enforcement and city governance, Bryan 
continues to share his wealth of knowledge as an Adjunct Professor of 
Criminal Justice at Ventura College. His influence extends well beyond 
the classroom, as he has taken on leadership positions with 
organizations that impact the entire community. Bryan has served as the 
Chairperson for the American Cancer Society Gold Coast Community 
Council, Board President of the Elite Theatre Company, and is an active 
member of the Alcohol and Drug Advisory Board for the County of Ventura 
Behavioral Health Department. He is also deeply involved with the 
Knights of Columbus, Council 750, and has contributed countless hours 
to making Oxnard a better place for all.
  A long-time resident of Oxnard, Bryan and his wife Lorraine have 
called this community home since 1985. Together, they have been a 
constant presence in our city, investing in its people, its future, and 
its wellbeing.
  As Bryan steps down from his role on the City Council, I join our 
community in expressing our appreciation for his immense contributions 
to public safety, education, and the overall commitment to building a 
better and stronger Oxnard. From his distinguished career in law 
enforcement to his leadership in governance and his community 
involvement, Bryan MacDonald has served our community well.
, it is with great esteem and respect that I recognize 
Bryan MacDonald for his invaluable service to the City of Oxnard. I 
thank him for his many years of leadership and commitment, and I wish 
him continued success in the next chapter of his lifes journey.
I rise today to recognize Karen Matthews, 
the Christian County, Missouri, Treasurer, on her retirement. Christian 
County is home to nearly 90,000 citizens in the southwest part of 
Missouri, and Ms. Matthews has served as an elected official there for 
22 years.
  During her tenure, Ms. Matthews has achieved many accomplishments. 
She manages nearly $50 million annually in county revenue and 
transitioned the countys operations from a third-class county to a 
first-class county due to the areas population growth. She initiated 
online banking for the county, direct deposit payroll for county 
employees and implemented premier financial software. She also saved 
the county thousands of dollars by implementing a more efficient time 
and attendance software. Finally, despite the millions of annual 
transactions, the county has successfully passed all of its dozens of 
audits with 100-percent compliance.
, a position 
she has held since 2012. She also is the treasurer for Mt. Zion Baptist 
Church, serves on the Missouri County Treasurers Association 
legislative board and is a member of several area chambers of commerce. 
In addition to her public service, she has been the co-owner of several 
small businesses in the construction and home design fields.
  Id like to congratulate Ms. Matthews on her well-deserved 
retirement. She has faithfully executed her responsilities as county 
treasurer and she will be missed. I wish her the very best in the next 
phase of her life.
RECOGNIZING MONIQUEC CONNER AS OHIOS 13TH CONGRESSIONAL DISTRICT 
                                of ohio
today, I rise to recognize Moniquec Conner 
as Ohios 13th Congressional District Champion of the Week.
  Moniquec is a trailblazing civil rights activist. She was recently 
recognized with a Humanitarian Stone Award from the National Action 
Network, an organization dedicated to advancing civil rights issues.
  This award reflects the years of hard work, dedication, and 
perseverance that she has invested in our community and fighting for 
the advancement of civil rights. Her commitment has remained 
steadfast--the hallmark of concerned and responsible citizenship.
  Moniquec is currently the chair of the Ohio Women in the NAACP, and 
in 1999, she revitalized the Stark County branch of the NAACP, serving 
as its president in 2000.
  In addition to her work for the NAACP, she is also the interim 
president of the National Action Network chapter that serves Stark and 
Summit counties.
  As she has throughout her remarkable career, Moniquec continues to 
focus on issues such as police accountability, voting rights, corporate 
responsibility, pension diversity, youth leadership, crisis intake, 
victim assistance, and bridging the digital divide.
  I would like to thank Moniquec for her dedication to fighting for 
change, and the amazing

work she does on behalf of the community. As a woman in a position of 
influence, she has certainly inspired the next generation of leaders to 
stand strong in their convictions and fight for justice.
  Moniquecs unwavering championing of civil rights exemplifies the 
very spirit that makes Ohios 13th Congressional District the 
``Birthplace of Champions. With this national recognition, she has 
certainly made our community proud.
I rise today to recognize my Staff 
Director, Sophie Mirviss, for her work on behalf of every constituent 
in Minnesotas Third Congressional District. In October, Sophie 
departed my office for a new opportunity to serve as the Chief of Staff 
to the Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for the Middle East and I 
could not be more proud or grateful for her service.
  Sophies journey as a public servant began just after she graduated 
from Johns Hopkins University in 2018 with a bachelors degree in 
international studies and a minor in economics. Though she was 
initialjy hired as my scheduler, her expertise in foreign policy led 
her to become my National Security Legislative Assistant. Soon after, 
she joined the House Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on the Middle East. 
North Africa, and Global Counterterrorism in which she served under 
Reps, Ted Deutch (FL-22) and David Cicilline (RI-0 1). In this time, 
she worked her way up from Professional Staff Member to the 
Subcommittee Staff Director all the while pursuing a masters degree in 
defense and strategic studies at the U.S. Naval War College. As a 
Minnesota District Three native. Sophie understands how diplomacy and 
conflicts in far-away lands can impact our own communities, which has 
made her a wonderful advocate for our constituents in the foreign 
policy sphere.
  Sophie is a powerhouse. She is not only a master knitter, but also an 
embodiment of what every congressional staffer strives to be. Confident 
in her abilities and fearless in her pursuit of peace through better 
policy, she brings a fire and intensity to her work that inspires 
everyone to be the best version of themselves. Sophie is just the type 
of person you would want with you in the case of a zombie apocalypse--
she is smart, determined, loyal, and a joy to be around. For that, 
weve been extremely grateful to have her on our team.
  The people of Minnesotas Third Congressional District were lucky to 
have her dedication and leadership, and she will be dearly missed. 
However, Im extraordinarily happy that she will continue to do this 
work and serve the Nation. I wish Sophie all the best in her future 
endeavors and thank her for six years of faithful service to this 
Nation.
I rise today to celebrate the life of the 
Honorable Mildred C. Crump, a visionary leader and trailblazer from my 
beloved city of Newark, New Jersey. Mildred was a woman of many 
``firsts and her wisdom, guidance, and unwavering belief in justice 
helped shape my life and career--and transformed the lives of so many 
others. As the first African American woman elected to the Newark City 
Council and as the councils first woman president, Mildred broke 
barriers and demonstrated a steadfast commitment to equity, justice, 
and community empowerment.
  Her dedication to improving the lives of others--whether through her 
pioneering work as New Jerseys first African American Braille teacher 
or her tireless advocacy for housing, education, and civil rights--has 
left an everlasting mark on our city, state, and Nation. Council 
President Crump was more than a role model. She was a relentless 
advocate and champion for people, and a brilliant community strategist. 
She blazed a path for so many and was always a source of unwavering 
support for those of us who had the honor of learning from her. 
Mildreds leadership, compassion, and vision will be profoundly missed.
  All Newarkers mourn the loss of this exceptional woman. I send my 
deepest condolences to her children, Larry and Sheri, and all her loved 
ones. I know Mildreds legacy and impact will live on. It lives on in 
me and many others.
  I thank Mildred C. Crump, on behalf of all the little Black and brown 
girls she has inspired and provided a light to shine. We love you 
forever.
I include in the Record a poem 
submitted at the request of a Virginia Beach constituent, Rabbi Dr. 
Israel Zoberman of Temple Lev Tikvah, and are a reflection of his 
views:

     The fragile yet formidable Chanukah candles
     We tenderly lit, daringly defy the suffocating
     Darkness around us and in us,
     Soothing and softening, we pray, all who
     Their magic of evoked memories of elation
     And trepidation with oil--dripping levivot
     (Potato pancakes) for expectant levavot
     (Hearts) while partaking of sustaining sweet
     Sufganiyot (donuts) to counteract the bitterness
     Of previous and following defeats,
     Celebrating a temporary victory before the
     Hasmonians intra-feuds hastened the demise
     Of short-lived Jewish sovereignty with warning
     Lessons for the contemporary scene of mounting
     Extremism and spreading strife,
     With hostages in death-filled Gaza darkness
     Still-second Chanukahs Festival of Lights
     In captivity, how tragically ironic!--desperately
     Yearning for liberating light lagging too long
     Behind and may not come, and for too many
     Their wondrous light already snuffed out by
     Those adoring the dark with the candle of each
     Unique life burning down before its time and
     Forever lost is that consecrated inner oil,
     Though only we, todays brave Maccabees,
     Possess the priestly power to extinguish

     The miracle of the bright Chanukia (menorah)
     Embedded deep within us.

  Rabbi Dr. Israel Zoberman is the founder of Temple Lev Tikvah in 
Virginia Beach. Kazakhstans only born rabbi, he is the son of Polish 
Holocaust Survivors and spent his early childhood in transit and DP 
Camps in Austria and Germany. He grew up in Haifa, Israel.