I rise today to recognize and celebrate the 
outstanding interns who have dedicated their time and talents to 
serving the 20th District of California this fall. These bright and 
committed young people, working from both our Washington, D.C., and 
Clovis, California offices, have brought fresh perspectives, unwavering 
enthusiasm, and a shared passion for making a difference. At a time 
when many young people are questioning the role of public service, 
their dedication inspires confidence in the leaders of tomorrow.
  As their fall internships come to a close, I want to express my 
deepest gratitude to Grace Lee Delgado, Elijah Lidgett, and Tristan 
Wertanzl for their contributions to our Washington, D.C., office and to 
Jake Dowell for his service in our Clovis, California office. Their 
hard work has been instrumental to our efforts, and I trust that the 
skills and educational experiences they have gained will guide them 
toward continued success in their future endeavors in public service.
I rise today to celebrate the career and 
professional achievements of Diana Gomez, who spent over 36 years as an 
electrical engineer and contributed to our community as part of the 
California Department of Transportation (Caltrans).
  Born in Fresno and raised in the City of Parlier, Ms. Gomez graduated 
from Parlier High School and was named as the first member of the 
Parlier Unified School District Hall of Fame. She earned her bachelors 
degree in electrical engineering at California State University, 
Fresno.
36 years of transportation experience 
with Caltrans in various positions, including Senior Transportation 
Electrical Engineer and Chief for the offices of Traffic Management and 
Systems Management Operations. In 2011, Ms. Gomez was appointed as the 
Deputy District Director of Operations in Los Angeles, making her the 
highest-ranking Latina engineer within the California State Employees, 
a title she still holds.
  Her last assignment with Caltrans was serving as District 6 Director 
with responsibility for the State Highway system in Fresno, Madera, 
Kings, Tulare and Kern counties. From the time she filled the role in 
July 2020 up to her retirement, she helped secure more than one billion 
dollars for the district and local partner projects.
  Prior to her appointment as District 6 Director, Ms. Gomez was 
appointed by Governor Brown in 2012 to serve as the Central Valley 
Regional Director of the California High-Speed Rail Authority. As the 
Regional Director, she worked to build strategies and maintain 
relationships with local advocates, residents, consultants, and policy 
makers to ensure the high-speed rail project in the Central Valley 
continued on-time and on budget.
(SHPE) and was even named one of the ``100 Most Influential 
Hispanics by the Hispanic Business magazine for her role as SHPEs 
National President. She served in this role for six years, having also 
occupied several other leadership positions with the organization. 
Under her leadership, SHPE grew exponentially in its membership and 
revenue.
a member 
of the Fresno State School of Engineering Advisory Council, Vice Chair 
of the Fresno State Alumni Association, and Board Member for the Fresno 
State Transportation Institute. Her other professional affiliations 
include serving on the Board of Directors for the Society of Hispanic 
Professional Engineers, and she is a member of Women in Transportation 
(WTS) and founder of the WTS Central Valley Chapter.
  I call on my colleagues to join me in celebrating the exceptional 
career and lifetime achievements of Diana Gomez, and to congratulate 
her on her well-deserved retirement.
I rise today to congratulate Janet Williams 
on her retirement as Mayor of the City of Savage. Janet was born and 
raised on a dairy farm in Savage, Minnesota. She attended Burnsville 
High School, where she graduated as the valedictorian. After completing 
her undergraduate degree at the College of St. Teresa in Winona, 
Minnesota, she came back home to Savage. For 30 years, Janet served as 
Scott Countys Library Director. In this role, she was responsible for 
running all Scott County libraries while supporting library expansion 
projects.
  In 2004, Janet was elected as a Savage Councilmember and just four 
years later, Janet became the first woman Mayor of Savage. She has held 
this office for over 17 years. As Mayor, Janet pushed for investments 
in mental health programs, including those offered to first responders. 
She founded the Dan Patch Historical Society and championed various 
local projects, including key redevelopment projects and infrastructure 
improvements. Under her leadership, she also promoted the importance of 
partnering on key initiatives with nearby community leaders and 
partners.
  Im proud to have worked with Janet since I first came to Congress in 
2019. Her commitment to the community of Savage is unparalleled and I 
have greatly appreciated her partnership and guidance, especially with 
concern to local priorities.
  I thank Janet for her years of service to our community.
I rise to celebrate the impactful 
service of my friend and colleague, Congresswoman Cori Bush.
  Congresswoman Bush came to Congress making history as the first Black 
woman elected from Missouri.

  Her work as a faith leader, nurse and community organizer at the 
frontlines of the Black Lives Matter Movement prepared her to fight for 
the people of St. Louis in the halls of Congress.
  Since coming to Congress, Congresswoman Bush has made her mark as an 
outspoken voice for racial, social and reproductive justice.
  Rep. Bush fought to address systemic inequities in healthcare, 
policing and housing. She has been a consistent champion for policies 
that uplift and empower every community in St. Louis.
  Representative Cori Bush is and will continue to be a fearless voice 
for justice and equity.
  Her advocacy for working families, Black and brown people, the LGBTQ+ 
community, and all marginalized groups has made a lasting impact on her 
constituents not only on her district but our Nation.
  Her commitment to her values has shaped the direction of this 
Congress and inspired others to join the movement for change.
  I thank her for her incredible service and leadership, and I wish her 
well in this next chapter.
it is an honor to recognize the 
incrredible legacy of my colleague, and friend, Congresswoman Kay 
Granger.
  I have had the pleasure of working alongside many dedicated public 
servants, but few have shown the consistent leadership, integrity, and 
commitment to their constituents that Kay has demonstrated over her 
incredible career in public office.
  She has represented the Twelfth Congressional District of Texas with 
unwavering dedication in her nearly three decades in Congress.
  From being the first woman elected to represent Texas Twelfth 
District, to her trailblazing work as the first woman to chair the 
House Appropriations Committee, Kay has always set new standards of 
excellence in her time in Washington.
  I not only serve with her as a fellow member of the Appropriations 
Committee, but I also had the privilege of being elected in the same 
class as Kay. During that time, I have witnessed the skill and 
dedication Kay displays first-hand. A staunch supporter of our Nations 
military, a champion for infrastructure, and a force behind national 
security efforts, her goal has always been to advance the interests of 
the American people.
  Kays legacy will go far beyond the legislation. Her mentorship of 
countless members of this body will outlast even her biggest 
legislative accomplishments. Through her deep understanding of the 
issues, and willingness to work with both sides of the aisle, she will 
be remembered for putting service to the American people before 
partisanship.
, on behalf of the people in Alabamas Fourth 
Congressional District, I want to thank Congresswoman Granger for her 
service to this Nation, her invaluable contributions to Congress, and 
most importantly, her friendship. She will leave a legacy that will be 
felt for generations to come.
HONORING KEIRSTEN LYONS FOR HER DEDICATION TO AMERICAS FALLEN HEROES
I rise today to honor 
Keirsten Lyons, Director of the Washington State Fallen Heroes Project, 
a woman whose lifes mission exemplifies the enduring power of love and 
remembrance. Her dedication to her sons memory and to the families of 
our Nations Fallen Heroes is a profound testament to the enduring 
sacrifices made in defense of our freedoms.
  Keirstens journey is one of love, resilience, and a mothers 
unyielding commitment to ensure her sons sacrifice is never forgotten. 
On January 1, 2014, her beloved son, Marine Sergeant Jacob Michael 
Hess, gave his life during a deployment to Afghanistan in support of 
Operation Enduring Freedom. Sgt. Hess was a dedicated Marine, a 
cherished husband, son, brother, and friend who embodied the highest 
ideals of service and honor. Though her loss is unimaginable, Keirsten 
has transformed her grief into a powerful force for good, ensuring that 
the legacy of her son and so many others lives on.
  As the Director of the Washington State Fallen Heroes Project, 
Keirsten has committed herself to a sacred mission, to honor those who 
raised their hand to serve and made the ultimate sacrifice, to support 
the families who carry the weight of their loss, and to engage 
communities in never forgetting the price of freedom. Her work serves 
as a rallying call to all of us, reminding us that the freedoms we hold 
dear were secured through unimaginable sacrifices.
  Under Keirstens leadership, the Project has expanded its reach and 
impact. Events such as the March for the Fallen, Ruck, Run, or Walk 
have created spaces for families and communities to come together in 
shared remembrance. For Keirsten, these gatherings are deeply personal. 
By sharing their stories, families transform grief into connection, 
ensuring their loved ones remain alive in the hearts of those who learn 
their stories.
  Through initiatives like the Illuminating Courage Memorial and the 
Heroes Garden, Keirsten has built a legacy of remembrance in the 
Eastern Washington community that will endure for generations. Her 
tireless efforts have provided comfort and healing to Gold Star 
families, creating a community where grief is shared, and the 
sacrifices of the Fallen are eternally honored. She reminds us that 
behind every Fallen Hero is a family who has borne the cost of freedom.
, on behalf of the United States House of Representatives 
and the citizens of Washingtons Fifth Congressional District, I extend 
my deepest gratitude to Keirsten Lyons for her extraordinary devotion. 
May her work continue to remind us that the legacy of a hero does not 
end on the battlefield--it lives on in the stories we tell, the 
memories we preserve, and the gratitude we hold.
I was unable to be present in the 
chamber on Wednesday, December 11, 2024, due to a family medical 
emergency. Unfortunately, the final version of the FY2025 NDAA includes 
a misguided provision preventing the dependents of service members from 
receiving the medical treatment they need and deserve. Further, the 
bill callously stripped provisions that would have given more service 
members and their partners the ability to start a family through IVF. 
However, as the Ranking Member of the Military Construction and 
Veterans Affairs Appropriations Subcommittee, I fight every day to 
improve the quality of life of our service members and their families 
and on balance, this bill does that. Among many meaningful investments, 
it includes a 14.5 percent pay raise for junior enlisted and a 4.5 
percent pay raise for all other service members while eliminating 
contraceptive copayments for TRICARE beneficiaries. I will continue to 
fight for all service members and their families to receive the 
benefits and care they deserve.
  Had I been present, I would have voted YEA on Roll Call No. 499 and 
YEA on Roll Call No. 500.
I rise today to recognize an extraordinary 
Arkansan, my friend, Jim Shenep.
  It is unbelievable that three decades after we started working 
together, it is time for him to retire.
  I want to say how thankful I am for our three decades of friendship, 
and Martha and I treasure our relationship with him and his family.
  It has been such a privilege to watch his continued success, starting 
when we were at First Commercial, then Regions, then Delta Trust, and 
now at Simmons.
  He has always put his customers first, and that was at the heart of 
what we tried to build at Delta Trust, and I know it is at the heart of 
Simmons Trust Company.
  I wish him well in his retirement and I wish I could be there with 
him in person to celebrate, but I wanted to thank him for his 
dedication to his customers and our friendship.
I rise today to recognize my Legislative 
Director, Griffin Wong, for his work on behalf of every constituent in 
Minnesotas Third Congressional District. I am thrilled that the end of 
my time in Congress will not be the end of Griffins service to the 
district, as he will now become the Legislative Director for my 
successor, Congresswoman-elect Kelly Morrison. I could not be more 
proud or grateful for his service.
  Hailing from Montgomery County, Maryland, Griffin had an early 
introduction to life on the Hill. His mother worked for Congressman 
Bill Lipinski of Illinois when he was young, laying the groundwork for 
him to live a life of service. After graduating from Boston College in 
2017, he set off to Phoenix, Arizona to teach at Brophy College 
Preparatory. In addition to teaching there he also coached tennis and 
ran their immigration advocacy program.
  Griffin started his work in government in the Massachusetts State 
Senate before moving over to the U.S. Senate for Senator Chris Van 
Hollen, and then to the U.S. House of Representatives in my office. 
Griffin has spent most of his career working on banking and small 
business issues. During his tenure as my Legislative Assistant, he 
guided my role as the Vice-Ranking Member of the House Committee on 
Small Business as well as co-chair of the House Entrepreneurship Caucus 
and House Stakeholder Capitalism Caucus. Griffin took over as my 
Legislative Director during a pivotal moment in our office and has 
shown strong initiative in directing my entire legislative agenda.
  Griffin has grown into a valuable team leader during his time in the 
office. From tackling particular legislative issues to now directing 
the legislative agenda, he has done so with a sense of humor and 
practicality that is admirable. He stepped up when the office needed 
him the most. As a Legislative Director, Griffin brings a calm and 
collected energy, giving staff a sense of ease and confidence that the 
job will be accomplished. Griffin is one of the hardest workers I know. 
No matter how busy he might be, he will take the time for a phone call 
from a colleague or a meeting with a constituent because he cares so 
deeply about this work. His instincts, critical thinking, and 
thoughtfulness have made him a strong leader and manager. He is a 
trusted advisor, a fierce advocate for his team, and a committed public 
servant for our constituents.
  The people of Minnesotas Third Congressional District were lucky to 
have his dedication and leadership, and Im extraordinarily happy that 
he will continue to do this work and serve the Nation and people of 
Minnesotas Third Congressional District. I wish Griffin all the best 
in his future endeavors and thank him for six years of faithful service 
to this Nation--and many more to come.
I wish to recognize and say a special thank 
you to a truly exceptional U.S. Army officer, Lieutenant Colonel Joseph 
D. Henderson.
  Lieutenant Colonel Henderson has served admirably as a Congressional 
Budget Liaison for the Assistant Secretary of the Army, Financial 
Management and Comptroller, for the past four years. Over that time, I 
have come to appreciate Joes work as he served as a fellow supporting 
my office and other Members of our Appropriations Committee. He helped 
my staff better understand the Department of Defense through his years 
of experience as an Army officer, and led countless oversight and 
factfinding visits for staff across the globe providing them invaluable 
firsthand knowledge, doing so with a level of skill and professionalism 
that has left a lasting impression on me and my staff.
  Lieutenant Colonel Henderson graduated from the University of Texas 
at El Paso in 2004, earning a Bachelor of Arts in History. He 
commissioned as a Transportation Officer, completing Officer Candidate 
School at Fort Benning, Georgia.
  Lieutenant Colonel Hendersons first assignment was as a platoon 
leader with the Alpha Company, 302d Brigade Support Battalion at Camp 
Casey, South Korea. Lieutenant Colonel Henderson attended U.S. Army 
Airborne School enroute to his assignment as 99th Movement Control Team 
Mobility Officer in Italy. He deployed in this role to Iraq in support 
of Operation Iraqi Freedom in 2007. Lieutenant Colonel Henderson took 
command of the 99th MCT from 2008 to 2010 deploying again to Iraq in 
support of Operation Iraqi Freedom.
  After serving as the executive officer for the 92nd Military Police 
Company, Major Dickson was selected to attend the Marine Corps 
Expeditionary Warfare School in Quantico, Virginia. During his time in 
Quantico, Major Dickson published an article for the U.S. Naval 
Institute and earned honors as a distinguished graduate.
  Lieutenant Colonel Henderson served as the Assistant Brigade S4 for 
the 16th Combat Aviation Brigade at Joint Base Lewis-McChord, 
Washington. He took command of Echo Company, 2-158th Assault Helicopter 
Battalion from 2011-2013.
  Lieutenant Colonel Henderson served as an Assistant Professor of 
Military Science at Pacific Lutheran University in Tacoma from 2013-
2015. He was assigned to Fort Bragg where he held positions at the 82nd 
Airborne Division as the Division Transportation Officer and Deputy G4, 
the Support Operations Officer for the 189th Combat Sustainment 
Support, and as the Brigade Operations Officer for the 82nd Airborne 
Division Sustainment Brigade.
  As a Congressional Budget Liaison, Lieutenant Colonel Henderson has 
been the Armys conduit to several Congressional offices and 
committees. In the course of this service, he has built a reputation of 
trust, respect, and competency. His efforts have been widely respected 
and have shown great credit to the Army.
  Lieutenant Colonel Hendersons wife, Annie, and children, Harper and 
Hudson, have supported him throughout his career. Their sacrifice and 
love make everything he does possible.
  Joes extraordinary career is a testament to his hard work and 
unyielding desire to make himself, his organizations, and his fellow 
Soldiers the best they can be. Our Nation has been enriched by his 
leadership, thoughtful judgement, and exemplary work.
  On behalf of the U.S. House and a grateful Nation, I join my 
colleagues today in recognizing and commending Joe on his service to 
our Nation. We wish Joe, Annie, Harper, and Hudson all the best.