I rise today to celebrate the 50th 
anniversary of the founding of Genesis of Ann Arbor in Ann Arbor, 
Michigan. Housing both a Jewish and a Episcopal congregation, Genesis 
of Ann Arbor exemplifies interfaith understanding, cooperation, and 
friendship. For the past five decades, Genesis has been a beacon of 
hope, tolerance, and community in southeast Michigan.
  In 1969, Temple Beth Emeth moved into the building housing St. 
Clares Episcopal Church. While their relationship was always 
harmonious, by 1974, the members of Temple Beth Emeth felt that their 
congregation had grown large enough to warrant its own synagogue. St. 
Clares Reverend, Doug Evett, offered to Temple Beth Emeths Rabbi, 
Bruce Warshal, that the two congregations become one legal entity. The 
offer was accepted, and Genesis of Ann Arbor was founded in 1975.
  From the time that the two congregations began their relationship, 
Genesis of Ann Arbor was a ray of light during the tumultuous 1960s 
and 1970s. The congregations continued to grow, and Temple Beth Emeth 
is now the largest Jewish congregation in Washtenaw County, Michigan. 
These congregations were, and still are, a reminder that whatever their 
differences may be, two communities can come together around an 
understanding of shared principles. This includes an annual pulpit 
exchange between the two congregations clergy as well as a joint 
Thanksgiving service. Every year over Thanksgiving, they jointly host 
the Rotating Shelter, which provides a weeklong overnight shelter for 
men experiencing homelessness. A local non-profit food bank, Food 
Gatherers, has hosted its Back Door Food Pantry there for several 
years, where members of both the church and the synagogue donate to and 
volunteer at the food pantry.
  Since its founding, Genesis of Ann Arbor has shown that the joining 
of two congregations can reinforce common values while maintaining 
distinct religious traditions. Over the decades, the members of Genesis 
have fought for a wide range of goals rooted in those values, from 
advancing racial justice to combating the climate crisis. Their 
commitment to the environment is proven by only using renewable energy 
to power the building by the large solar panel array they had installed 
on their roof as well as switching from gas heat to geothermal heating 
and cooling. Two years ago, the congregations organized their first 
annual Ann Arbor Climate Teach-In at Genesis. The event served as an 
opportunity to draw environmental advocates together to discuss 
important climate issues, and I have sincerely enjoyed participating 
both years.
, I ask my colleagues to join me today in celebrating the 
50th anniversary of the founding of Genesis of Ann Arbor. Its members 
represent the spirit of America, serving their community and promoting 
peace, and understanding, all while worshipping in their own way. We 
wish them the best in the years to come.
I rise today to congratulate my friend 
Captain Joseph J. Ring, the Commander of the Naval Surface Group Middle 
Pacific on his retirement from the United States Navy after thirty 
years of service to our Nation.
  As Commander of Naval Surface Group Middle Pacific, Captain Ring led 
the successful transition of the newly aligned MIDPAC team in manning, 
training, and maintaining all surface ships homeported at Joint Base 
Pearl Harbor-Hickam. Thanks to Captain Rings leadership, the U.S. 
Navys Hawaii-based ships remain combat ready for sustained operations 
in the Inda-Pacific and around the world.
  Over the course of his career as a Surface Warfare Officer, Captain 
Ring served in four countries and operated at sea in every Combatant 
Command theater of operation. At sea, he served as Commander of 
Destroyer Squadron Three One, Commanding Officer of the USS Hopper 
(DDG-70), and Commanding Officer of the USS Mustin (DDG-89). Ashore, he 
served as Flag Aide to the Commander, Navy Region Hawaii; Warfare 
Systems Advisor to the Royal Australian Navy in Sydney, Australia; 
Director, Joint Operations Center (J31), United States Africa Command 
in Stuttgart, Germany; and as Chief of Staff to the Director, Maritime 
Operations, U.S. Pacific Fleet.
  His many awards include the Royal Australian Navy Chief of Navy Gold 
Medal, Peruvian Naval Medal of Honor for Merit, the Legion of Merit, 
the Defense Meritorious Service Medal, and various other personal, 
campaign and unit awards including the Battle ``E Excellence Award. 
He also received the title of Honorary Chief Petty Officer in 
recognition of his contributions to the Chief Petty Officer community 
and the enlisted force.
  On a personal note, Joe has always been the one who helps ``get me to 
yes. Service above self is a way of life for Joe, and the values we 
cherish in Hawaii mirrors his own. While his Navy service brought him 
to Hawaii, we know our islands are a place he loves and protects as his 
home.
  As Joe, Nada, and their entire family transition to a new chapter, I 
proudly join them in celebrating a tremendous career that will continue 
to inspire and motivate future generations of leaders. But even more 
importantly, I wish them all the best in enjoying a well-earned 
retirement.
  Joe, mahalo for all that you have done and given to our country.
I rise today to offer my sincerest 
congratulations to retiring police Officer Chuong Vo.
  Officer Vo has served as a law enforcement officer for 28 years, 
proudly defending his community and uplifting his neighbors.
  Officer Vos career has been defined by a legacy of honor, hard work, 
and love of his community. Im sure he will be greatly missed by the 
department.
  In addition to his time in law enforcement, Officer Vo has also 
served on the Cerritos City Council, the Cerritos Community Safety 
Committee, as well as Mayor Pro Tem and the Mayor of Cerritos.
  I congratulate Officer Vo and I sincerely hope he enjoys the next 
chapter in his retirement.
the U.S. Census seeks to count every 
American, every ten years. They do this so that every American may be 
equally represented and heard in this chamber by one of us. Friends, 
colleagues, Democrats, and Republicans, I submit this statement 
tonight, because nearly 250 years after our founding, the people of 
North Carolina are still not being fairly heard on this floor.
  Before the first US Census count was conducted in 1790, North 
Carolina lawmakers, who looked nothing like me to say the least, joined 
with other representatives from southern states in advocating that 
African-American slaves be counted as ``three-fifths of a resident. 
More residents meant more congressional power. So they wanted our 
ancestors to count--but they denied them the vote. They wanted our 
bodies, but not our voices.
  The echoes of that anti-democratic sentiment live today through 
gerrymandering. The effects of it are felt by all North Carolina voters 
and indeed, most voters around the country. The people of Alabama, 
Florida, Illinois, Maryland, Ohio, Texas, and Florida are not being 
fairly heard on this floor.
  To this day, the practice of gerrymandering drags the feet of our 
democracy, back to the early days of our nation when most of our 
citizens did not have a voice. The New Majority is built on it, but 
both parties are complicit in it. I am standing on this tonight, 
because I wont stand for it anymore.
  Gerrymandering does more than sand the gears of our democracy. It 
harms our ability to govern. We can count people a lot faster than we 
could in 1790, but theres a reason the Census is only done every ten 
years. The long stability period gives us time to get to know our 
constituents, their needs, and the needs of the land, businesses, and 
organizations therein. Its why its important that these districts 
represent cohesive communities. But that stability in governance has 
not been the case for my constituents, or for most in North Carolina.
  The Republican Majority in the North Carolina General Assembly 
engaged in political pornography to stack congressional districts in 
their favor, locking 10 of our 14 congressional districts into 
Republican control in a state that voted 50-50 for the US House.
  Over the past ten years of my service, this district has undergone 
changes in 2016, 2020, 2022, and now here in 2024. My first district 
looked something like a potted plant, growing along I-85 from Charlotte 
to Greensboro. If I knew then my district would evolve four more times, 
I might have traded my house for an RV. Starting in January Ill have 
served the fifth configuration of my district in ten years. Most of you 
in this chamber whove served as long as I have, have served just two 
in that same time period.
  Think about what serving five different districts does to our efforts 
at governance. Every year I give a State of the District speech, and 
Im either saying goodbye or introducing myself to half my 
constituents. Many are surprised to hear from me.
  Frequently redrawn districts mean weakened and less effective 
governance. Constituents need a representative in Congress often for 
basic help with federal services, like their Social Security checks, 
unemployment insurance, Veterans benefits, passport services, etc. 
Constantly scrambling relationships between offices and constituents 
hurts this process, and hurts our constituents. Worse, it undermines 
the basic faith Americans have in democracy.
  The problem is especially bad in Charlotte, one of the Nations 
fastest-growing cities, where many inhabitants relocated from elsewhere 
and feel especially disengaged with local politics. As hospitable 
southerners, our state leaders should take responsibility for changing 
this. Unfortunately, perpetuating it is more in line with our history.
  State-level lawmakers are egged on by their counterparts and former 
colleagues here in Washington. They think they are here to deliver for 
a party agenda, but let me tell you, we are not here to govern for 
ourselves or for a party. Were here to govern for the people. America 
has never been about those in power, but about the work to make a more 
perfect union.
  And there are answers.
  While it took nearly 200 years, the sons and daughters of former 
slaves did eventually realize their right to help choose the 
representatives who walk these halls tonight. As the Reverend Dr. 
Martin Luther King Jr. once said, ``the moral arc of the universe is 
long, but it bends toward justice.
  Legal standards for fairly drawn districts are not rocket science. 
The process worked--in Michigan, in Pennsylvania, and even, for a brief 
time, in North Carolina. National standards would be imperfect, but far 
greater than the status quo. They would ensure that the 330 million 
Americans we counted in 2020 are divided into 435 equally numbered, 
fairly and transparently drawn, more competitive districts that are 
representative of real communities. They would give us as 
representatives time to get to know our constituents, and maybe even 
solve a few more of their problems, too.
  While North Carolina Republicans have chosen party power over the 
cultivation of democracy, cynicism over faith in the people, and their 
newfound fears over whatever once inspired them to public service, the 
people will win in the end.
  Democracy will always have the last word.
I rise today to recognize the service and 
life of Hendrik ``Hank Poppen of Portage, Michigan. Hank Poppen was 
born in Wildervank, Netherlands, on July 28, 1951. He immigrated to the 
United States with his family in 1957 and became a United States 
citizen in 1988. Hank attended Kalamazoo Christian Schools and 
dedicated much of his life to serving the Kalamazoo and Portage 
communities.
  In 1989, Hank found a lifelong passion when he and his son Brian 
joined Boy Scout Troop 244, where he then became the Scout Leader. 
Through the years Hank watched his son, daughter, granddaughter, and 
175 other scouts rise to Eagle Scout. He took his beloved troop on 
hundreds of trips throughout the United States, even when his health 
failed him.
  Hank was a remarkable individual characterized by his faith and love 
for his community. Most of all, he loved his family. On November 12, 
2024, at the age of 73, Hank passed away surrounded by the people he 
loved most. He is survived by his children, grandchildren, siblings, 
dearest friends, and the many scouts, students, and people he impacted 
throughout his life.
, please join me in cherishing the memory of Hendrik 
Poppen. His dedication to his community, family, and friends, was 
unwavering, and his character will be remembered in the highest order.
I rise today to recognize Ms. Millisa 
Gary for her leadership and countless contributions over the course of 
her career in service of the American people.
1973 when, as a 
junior in high school, she accepted a position at the U.S. Department 
of Defense as an accounting assistant. She later earned a Bachelor of 
Science from George Mason University and a Master of Business 
Administration from Averett University. Throughout the last 50 years, 
a true asset within the federal workforce--providing 
leadership, guidance, and friendship to all who had the privilege of 
working with her.

  Since Ms. Gary began her distinguished career in federal service more 
than five decades ago, she has served at numerous agencies including 
the U.S. Department of Commerce, U.S. Department of Agriculture, and 
the U.S. Congress through her role on the U.S. Senate Committee on 
Small Business and Entrepreneurship. She currently serves as the U.S. 
General Services Administrations AbilityOne Program Executive where 
she provides valuable oversight and expertise.
In her current 
role, she helped expand employment opportunities for Americans who are 
blind or disabled. By partnering with more than 600 nonprofit agencies, 
she created pathways to meaningful employment, thereby transforming 
lives and reinforcing the federal governments commitment to 
inclusivity.
  Today, I congratulate Ms. Gary on her contributions, which will have 
a lasting impact on the federal workforce. Her exceptional career set a 
standard of excellence and innovation that will help inspire her 
colleagues and future leaders.
, I ask that you and our colleagues join me in honoring 
the retirement of Ms. Gary. I wish her the best as she retires after 
more than 50 years of public service.
I rise today to honor the remarkable life and 
legacy of Joan Dezember, a beloved figure in our community who passed 
away on October 13, 2024, at the age of 89. Alongside her late husband, 
Ray, Joan dedicated her life to family, community, and philanthropy.
  Joan was born in Whittier, California on February 19, 1935, to Martin 
and Jeannette Erreca. While attending Whittier College, she met her 
husband Ray Dezember in 1951, a Whittier College football star. An 
early sign of the couples complementary qualities, Ray led the 
football team as captain while Joan rallied the crowd as the head of 
Whittier Colleges cheerleaders. Rising to a new and exciting chapter 
in their lives, the couple married in 1954, and briefly lived in 
Phoenix before settling in Bakersfield, where Ray helped found American 
National Bank. American National Bank was acquired by Wells Fargo and 
the Dezembers were able to focus on their passion for giving, 
especially to California State University, Bakersfield (CSUB).
  The generous support to the community from Joan and Ray enabled the 
creation of important programs and facilities, including the Walter W. 
Stiern Librarys Dezember Reading Room and the Dezember Leadership 
Development Center, which continue to inspire students seeking to 
follow Joan and Rays path to achieve the American Dream. While such 
facilities will continue to uphold their names, it is the lives of 
fellow neighbors who were blessed to know Joan and Rays virtuous and 
loving touch, felt by so many in their family and in the Kern County 
community. The Dezembers certainly believed in the transformative power 
of education, as their support for scholarships like the Wendy Wayne 
Nursing Scholarship and the Hispanic Excellence Scholarship Fund has 
opened doors for countless students. As a lifetime member and the first 
Chairwoman of the CSUB Foundation Board of Directors, Joans ability to 
help others reached far and wide, earning her the CSUB Presidents 
Medal in 1999.
  Joan is survived by her four children, Becky, Brent, Cheri, and 
Katie, eleven grandchildren, and four great-grandchildren who will 
remember her as their kind, loving matriarch who found great joy in the 
success of others. Amanda and I send our deep condolences to the whole 
Dezember family and all who knew and loved her. On behalf of the 20th 
Congressional District, I am grateful to Joan, for what she has done 
for our community. She will be deeply missed but never forgotten.
I missed Roll Call vote No. 474 on November 
20, 2024. Had I been present, my vote would have been Yea on Roll Call 
No. 474.