I rise today to congratulate Greg Murphy, 
Executive Vice President and General Counsel of North Americas largest 
steel producer and recycler, Nucor Corporation. Tomorrow, June 7, 2025, 
Greg will retire from Nucor after serving the past decade as head of 
the companys legal department and overseeing Nucors public affairs, 
communications, and environmental functions.
  A native of Western New York, Greg spent his career in Charlotte 
after receiving his undergraduate degree from Canisius College and law 
degree from the University of Michigan. Greg had the honor of clerking 
for one of North Carolinas most well-known federal judges, the 
Honorable James McMillan, followed by a quarter century practicing law 
with Moore &amp; Van Allen, where Greg led the Litigation Practice Group 
and served on the Executive Committee.
  Gregs success would not have been possible without the love and 
support of his wife, Marcy, and their children, Sean and Alexandra. In 
addition to enjoying time with family, golf will play a prominent role 
in Gregs retirement. He is not only an avid golfer, but Greg was also 
once named the Southern Piedmont Conference Golf Coach of the Year, 
another accomplishment showing his dedication to the things he loves.
, please join me today in honoring Mr. Greg Murphy for his 
outstanding career with Nucor and leadership in North Carolinas legal 
community. I wish him the best in his retirement.
I rise today to honor and 
recognize Michelle and Dan King for their dedicated ministry and 
unwavering commitment to serving the Vicksburg community through New 
Beginnings Ministry of Vicksburg Training and Equipping Center.
  Since assuming leadership of the church in 2014, Michelle and Dan 
King have worked tirelessly to fulfill their mission of training and 
equipping followers of Christ, ensuring they are prepared for outreach 
and service. Their approach extends beyond the pulpit--they seek to 
empower individuals with the knowledge, faith, and tools needed to 
carry Gods message into the world.
  Michelle King not only ministers within the church but also serves as 
a hospice chaplain, providing comfort and spiritual guidance to those 
facing lifes most challenging moments. She further extends her 
ministry through a weekly Facebook Live lunchtime sermon, offering 
encouragement and faith-based teachings to a broader audience.
  In addition to their spiritual work, the Kings have made a tangible 
impact in the community through Gods Storehouse, a food distribution 
ministry that provides essential nourishment to families in need. Their 
dedication to service has brought hope and relief to many, reinforcing 
the foundational Christian principles of compassion and generosity.
  Michelles journey of faith is a testament to the transformative 
power of belief and perseverance. Though not raised in the church, she 
found her calling later in life and has since committed herself fully 
to guiding others on their own spiritual paths.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in recognizing Michelle 
and Dan King for their exceptional ministry and selfless contributions 
to the people of Vicksburg.
I rise today to recognize my former Policy 
Director, Elizabeth Joseph, for her service to the people of the Third 
Congressional District of Mississippi. Elizabeth joined my office with 
an impressive resume, having worked for Senator Thad Cochran and 
Congressman Gregg Harper. Elizabeth started with me when I was sworn 
into office in January 2019 and brought a wealth of knowledge that 
helped lay a solid foundation for my office.
  A native of Clinton, Mississippi, Elizabeth earned her bachelors 
degree from the University of Mississippi and was inducted into the Ole 
Miss Hall of Fame in 2010. Elizabeth also completed her Masters of 
Public Affairs at the University of Texas, researching the power of 
social media for members of Congress. Her impressive research was 
published through the Congressional Research Service.
  Elizabeth helped build a legislative team in my office that makes 
Mississippi a priority every day. Elizabeths knowledge of healthcare 
and defense issues, among others, has been recognized throughout her 
career. While serving on my team, Elizabeth was presented with the 
prestigious Patrick Henry Award from the National Guard Association of 
the United States. Elizabeths dedication to our national defense has 
been instrumental to Mississippi and our Nation.
  Elizabeth led sessions each year throughout the Third Congressional 
District with local leaders and elected officials. These sessions 
helped to build both relationships with the communities we serve and a 
greater understanding of the appropriations process, which has resulted 
in a high acceptance rate for community project funding requests 
submitted by my constituents.
  I am honored to have had Elizabeth Joseph on my staff these last 6.5 
years. My team and I will greatly miss her smile, expertise, and 
dedication to Mississippi. Elizabeth will continue her service to the 
United States Congress at the Senate Appropriations Committees Labor, 
Health and Human Services, Education, and Related Agencies 
Subcommittee. This is a huge honor for her and for the state of 
Mississippi. I thank Elizabeth for her dedication to my team, for 
laying a great foundation, and for always supporting fellow 
Mississippians. I am thankful to have had so many great years with her 
on my team. I wish Elizabeth the best in her new role.
I rise to honor the 200th anniversary of 
the Log Inn, a Gibson County landmark located on the outskirts of 
Haubstadt, just north of Evansville, Indiana.
  This great restaurant put down its roots in 1825, and bore witness to 
Indianas early growth, first as a trading post and a stagecoach stop 
between Evansville and Vincennes.
  On its bicentenary, the Log Inn is vaunted for hosting not just the 
Hoosier patrons that make up our community, but also importantly, 
Amencas 16th Commander in Chief, President Abraham Lincoln.
  Furthermore, it once served as a stop on the Underground Railroad and 
is recognized as the oldest restaurant in Indiana.
  Today, this monumental testament to the incredible history of our 
community serves Hoosier families daily as they enjoy both the great 
history of the Log Inn, and the delicious food it provides.
  I celebrate the Log Inn for all its contnbutions to Indianas 8th 
Congressional District, and I look forward to its continued success.
I rise today to honor World War II 
veteran and D-Day survivor, ``Papa Jake Larson, for his invaluable 
contributions to our nation.
  Eager to serve his country, Jake enlisted in the National Guard at 
just 15 years old after lying about his age. After the attack on Pearl 
Harbor in December, 1941, Jake was sent to Fort Dix, New Jersey before 
heading overseas to Europe. He advanced to the position of Operations 
Sergeant where he assisted in planning the invasion of Normandy in 
Operation

Overlord. In 1944, Jake arrived on the shores of Omaha Beach carrying 
74 pounds of gear and narrowly surviving what was at the time the 
largest amphibious operation in history. He avoided gunfire and 
landmines, fighting the German Nazi forces and helping to liberate 
France from Nazi control. Throughout his time in service, Jake bravely 
endured six battles, including the infamous Battle of the Bulge. The 
heroism and courage demonstrated by Jake and others were critical in 
defeating the Nazis and putting an end to the war.
  More recently, Jake Larson earned the nickname of ``Papa Jake from 
his online presence as a storyteller on TikTok and Instagram. Online, 
Papa Jake shares details of his time in the U.S. Army, teaching 
audiences about our nations history and reminding us of the sacrifices 
that have been made to protect our freedom. Jake has amassed over 1.3 
million followers on social media and his stories have touched 
countless lives.
  As we commemorate the 81st anniversary of D-Day, Id like to extend 
my gratitude and respect to Jake for his extraordinary bravery. Please 
join me in recognizing ``Papa Jake Larson for his dedicated service 
to our country.
I rise today to recognize Joseph 
Calabrigo as he retires from the Town of Danville.
  Joe has served Danville residents for decades, starting with the Town 
of Danville in 1985. He has served in many positions for the town, 
including Chief of Planning, Transportation Director, Administrative 
Services Director and Assistant Town Manager. He was appointed as Town 
Manager in 1993, being only the third person to hold this title since 
the towns inception. Throughout his tenure, Joe has worked tirelessly 
to foster a vibrant community in the Town of Danville and has 
diligently served the towns residents. Joe oversaw the development of 
all three of Danvilles General Plans and both Master Plans. He has 
worked with every councilmember ever elected in the town and worked 
alongside seven police chiefs. Additionally, Joes leadership was 
critical as he guided the town through three recessions and a global 
pandemic while still maintaining a balanced budget. Joe has continually 
demonstrated his steadfast commitment to service and his community.
  Joe is a consummate professional and his work has helped to shape 
Danville into the beautiful community it is today. His time as Town 
Manager is marked by his dedication and years of expertise as the 
longest tenured city or town manager in the Tri-Valley. His leadership 
and collaboration have galvanized the respect of many and have left an 
indelible impact on his neighbors and peers.
  Please join me in congratulating Joseph Calabrigo on his well-
deserved retirement after decades of devoted service to the Town of 
Danville.
had I been present, I would have voted YEA 
on Roll Call No. 153.
I rise today to honor Gavin Proffitt for 
his service to the House Committee on Energy and Commerce.
  A Lynchburg, Virginia native, Gavin began his career on Capitol Hill 
as a Research Assistant for Rep. Louie Gohmert (TX-01) in October 2016 
before becoming a Legislative Correspondent and Legislative Assistant 
for Rep. Bob Goodlatte (VA-06) and a Professional Staff Member for the 
Republican Study Committee. In February 2023, Gavin joined the House 
Committee on Energy and Commerce as a Professional Staff Member for the 
Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations after serving as a Senior 
Advisor to the Administrator and Medicaid Project Officer for the 
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. During his time working for 
the Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations, Gavin worked on a 
wide array of issues such as the fentanyl crisis, FDA drug shortages, 
and antimicrobial resistance.
  Recently, Gavin departed the House Committee on Energy and Commerce 
to take on a new role as Health Policy Advisor for Sen. Ron Johnson 
(WI). I wish him the best, congratulate him on his new role, and thank 
Gavin Proffitt for his service to the House Committee on Energy and 
Commerce.
I rise today to honor the life and legacy of 
Gerald ``Jerry Danforth, a distinguished Tribal leader, a decorated 
Navy veteran, and a beloved husband, father, and grandfather, who 
passed away on the morning of June 1, 2025, at the age of 78.
  Born on December 24, 1946, in Oneida, Wisconsin, to Leslie and Eva 
Schuyler Danforth, Jerry devoted his life to service--first to his 
country, and then to his people. He served honorably in the United 
States Navy for over three decades, retiring in 1994 with the esteemed 
rank of Force Master Chief, Naval Surface Force, U.S. Atlantic Fleet. 
He was a veteran of both the Vietnam War and Desert Storm, embodying 
courage, commitment, and leadership throughout his military career.
  Jerry brought the same conviction and discipline to his leadership 
within the Oneida Nation. He was elected Chairman of the Oneida 
Business Committee in 1995 and again in 2005, where he advocated 
tirelessly for policies that advanced Indian gaming, economic 
development, healthcare, higher education, and the preservation of the 
Oneida language. His long-term vision was to build a strong, 
sustainable economy not solely reliant on gaming and to enhance 
communication between tribal governance and the General Tribal Council.
  A public servant in every sense, Jerry also served his Nation as a 
judge on the Oneida Judiciary, where his wisdom, fairness, and devotion 
to justice left a lasting impact.
  Beyond his public service, Jerry was a man of deep personal warmth 
and abiding family values. He is survived by his loving wife, Pamela 
Johns Danforth, and their children Paul Jameson (Virna), Steve Jameson 
(Cathy), Tanya Wood (Steve), Gerald Danforth Jr. (Chitra), Patrick 
Danforth, and stepson Keith Bimosae Johns Herman. He is also survived 
by his brother James Danforth (Joanne), sister Joanne Smith (late Bruce 
Smith), and many grandchildren who brought him great joy. He was 
preceded in death by his son Thomas Danforth and his parents.
  Jerry lived a life rich with passion and purpose--he loved fishing, 
golf, entertaining with his prized green egg grill, red wine, 
chocolate, and pie. He cherished winters spent in South Padre Island 
with Pam and was happiest when surrounded by family and friends.
, Gerald ``Jerry Danforths life was defined by service, 
leadership, and love. He exemplified the highest ideals of his people 
and of this Nation. His legacy will endure in the lives he touched, the 
institutions he shaped, and the Nation he served so faithfully. I offer 
my deepest condolences to his family, his community, and the entire 
Oneida nation. May his memory be a blessing.
.R. 2483, the 
Substance Use-Disorder Prevention that Promotes Opioid Recovery and 
Treatment (SUPPORT) Reauthorization Act of 2025. This bill, which was 
first signed into law in 2018, aims to fight the opioid epidemic in our 
country by improving access to treatment, increasing recovery 
opportunities, and strengthening prevention initiatives. The opioid 
epidemic has devastated communities and torn apart families across our 
country, and H.R. 2483 is the latest in a long line of bipartisan 
efforts to address this problem and ensure Americans get the help they 
need without stigma or other barriers.
  However, we must acknowledge that this legislation came to the House 
Floor at a time when the Trump administration is systematically 
dismantling our Nations mental health and substance use treatment 
programs. In the last several months, the administration has announced 
plans to eliminate the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services 
Administration (SAMHSA) as an independent division of the Department of 
Health and Human Services (HHS), fired hundreds of SAMHSA employees, 
rescinded over $1 billion in state funding to treat mental health and 
substance use disorders, and proposed eliminating some of the very 
programs that are authorized in the SUPPORT Act. House Republicans have 
also just voted to make the largest health care cut in history in their 
so-called ``Big Beautiful Bill, taking away Medicaid from millions of 
Americans.
  While I will vote in favor of the SUPPORT Act, my concern is that 
this Republican led Congress has authorized these programs with no one 
left at the agencies to see them through.