I rise to pay tribute to a renowned 
Minnesota doctor who was taken from us much too soon. Dr. Charles 
Crutchfield III was just 62 years old when he passed, following a 2\1/
2\ year battle with non-Hodgkins lymphoma. His death is a deep and 
profound loss for his family, Minnesotas Black community, and our 
entire State.
  Charles was born in Minneapolis to a notable family of doctors. He 
attended Minnehaha Academy, graduated with honors in 1978, and attended 
Carleton College where he studied biology. He completed his medical 
education at Mayo Medical School in Rochester, Minnesota, and his 
dermatology residence at the University of Minnesota.
  A board-certified dermatologist for over 20 years, Charles was the 
first African-American dermatologist in Minnesota. He was selected as 
one of the top 10 dermatologists in the United States by Black 
Enterprise magazine and recognized by Minnesota Medicine as one of the 
100 Most Influential Healthcare leaders in Minnesota. He founded his 
own dermatology practice, Crutchfield Dermatology, in 2002. He served 
as President of the Minnesota Association of Black Physicians and was 
the team dermatologist for Minnesota Twins, Minnesota Wild, and 
Minnesota Vikings. But his pioneering work didnt stop with his own 
career, as he wrote regular articles for the Minnesota Spokesman-
Recorder focusing on health topics specifically pertinent to the Black 
community and recruited other Black physicians to contribute their own 
writing.
  Dr. Crutchfields work to advance medical knowledge continued as a 
part-time teacher, holding positions of Clinical Professor of 
Dermatology at the University of Minnesota Medical School and Benedict 
Distinguished Visiting Professor of Biology at Carleton College. 
Additionally, his Crutchfield Dermatology Foundation created a 
lectureship focused on ethnic skin to educate medical residents about 
treating skin of color. Charles also mentored students of color to help 
them gain admission to medical school and become doctors, with the goal 
of increasing future diversity among medical providers. Even from his 
hospital bed, Charles continued to teach his Cutaneous Biology course 
remotely.
  During the COVID pandemic, Dr. Crutchfield used his ``Doctors 
Advice column and significant community standing to educate the 
public about the disease, provide updates about the latest 
developments, and fight fear and misinformation about masks, social 
distancing and vaccinations. Charles employed his gift for 
communicating complex ideas in clear, concise language to save lives 
during a time of great challenge for our country.
  Charles had an impact on so many. He fought to save lives during his 
time on earth and will be greatly missed by his patients, friends, and 
family. Minnesota has lost a pioneering medical professional and a 
dedicated family man. A public Celebration of Life is currently being 
planned for later this summer. I extend my deepest condolences to 
Charles family and my gratitude for all he has done to make our 
communities healthier.
today, I introduce the District of Columbia 
National Guard Commanding General Residency Act, which would require 
the Commanding General of the D.C. National Guard to reside in D.C. 
Last Congress, the House Committee on Oversight and Reform passed this 
bill.
  D.C. has no control over the D.C. National Guard. Instead, the 
president controls the D.C. National Guard, which many Americans first 
learned either during the January 6, 2021, attack on the United States 
Capitol, when the Trump administration delayed deploying the D.C. 
National Guard to the Capitol for several hours, or during the June 
2020 attack by federal law enforcement on largely peaceful protestors 
outside the White House, in which the D.C. National Guard was used by 
the Trump administration as part of the attack. In contrast, governors 
of the states and the three territories that have National Guards each 
control their National Guards.
  I have long introduced a bill, the D.C. National Guard Home Rule Act, 
that would give the D.C. mayor control over the D.C. National Guard. 
Last Congress, the Houses fiscal year (FY) 2022 and FY 2023 National 
Defense Authorization Act included the D.C. National Guard Home Rule 
Act, but it was stripped out of the final versions of the FY 2022 and 
FY 2023 NDAA because Republicans threatened to vote against the must-
pass NDAA if it included the D.C. National Guard Home Rule Act.
  The Commanding General of the D.C. National Guard is the top official 
in the D.C. National Guard, is appointed by the president and is a 
federal employee. There are residency requirements for government 
officials in federal law, D.C. law and the laws of jurisdictions 
throughout the country. In fact, several states have laws that require 
the top official in their National Guard to reside in their state, and 
it is highly likely that every state and territory only appoints 
residents as the top official in their National Guard. The primary 
reason residency requirements exist is so that government officials 
have a connection to the residents they serve and in-depth knowledge of 
the unique issues and challenges faced by residents.
  Congress has justifiably required that certain federal officials 
reside in the jurisdiction to which they are appointed, including U.S. 
district court judges, U.S. Marshals and U.S. Attorneys. Similarly, 
Congress, which controls the local D.C. court system, has justifiably 
required local D.C. judges and members of the D.C. Judicial Nomination 
Commission and the D.C. Commission on Judicial Disabilities and Tenure 
to reside in D.C.
  There is no reason that the Commanding General of the D.C. National 
Guard, a federal entity that serves only D.C. residents and that has 
both a military and law enforcement role, should not be required to 
reside in D.C. A D.C. residency requirement for the Commanding General 
of the D.C. National Guard will lead to a better relationship between 
the D.C. National Guard and D.C. residents and is a matter of fairness 
for D.C. residents.
  I urge my colleagues to support this bill.
due to the State and Foreign 
Operations Subcommittee on Appropriations Markup, I missed the vote on 
the Motion to Recommit to H.R. 3564. Roll Call No. 288. Had I been 
present, I would have voted YEA on Roll Call No. 288.
I rise today to commend Deputy William 
Hollingsworth for his selfless and heroic acts on Friday, June 16, 
2023. Deputy Hollingsworth was helping stranded drivers amid the 
rapidly rising water early that Friday morning when he saw a motorist 
disappear beneath Highway 98. Deputy Hollingsworth rushed toward the 
motorist to provide aid without regard for his safety. He and the 
motorist were then swept into a flooded storm drain and traveled nearly 
100 feet under the four-lane highway. Despite this traumatic turn of 
events, Deputy Hollingsworth emerged on the other side, spotted the 
motorist, and continued to wade toward him to continue his rescue 
attempt. His courageous actions cannot be overstated.
  I, along with the entire Northwest Florida community, thank Deputy 
Hollingsworth for his devotion to duty and commitment to excellence. 
His valiant actions exemplify the very best of Northwest Floridas law 
enforcement. I

am proud to have him serving in Floridas First Congressional District.
  On behalf of the United States House of Representatives, I am 
privileged to recognize Deputy William Hollingsworth for his unwavering 
commitment to upholding the values of our local law enforcement 
agencies. I thank him for his service and offer my warmest regards and 
best wishes to him and his family.
I ask my colleagues to join me in honor of 
. With over 30 years of dedication to academia and 
consistent investment to close the achievement gap, Mr. Evans 
contribution to Sacramento is indelible.
1993. He spent years as a social studies 
teacher, coach, and an athletic director before his work in 
administration. As principal of Valley High School where he was 
recognized as leading one of Newsweeks Best High Schools in America, 
--the fourth largest district in California,
  During Mr. Evans twelve-year contribution with Natomas Unified 
School District, he has transitioned students to virtual learning 
during the COVID-19 pandemic and maneuvered a rising student population 
of over 5000 since his initiation. With IB programs available for 
students in grades TK-12, Natomas Unified is mauiculating passionate 
learners that are built for intercultural awareness and respect for 
all. I recognize Mr. Evans commendable diligence through the expansion 
of the Career Technical Programs, increasing high school graduation 
rates, and student acceptances to Universjty of California schools and 
California State University schools. The Natomas Unified School 
District has been integral for Mr. Evans collaboration and 
perseverance to growing independent learners and instilling a 
comprehensive and engaging curriculum.
, today we celebrate the retirement of Chris Evans, for 
enriching the Sacramento Area with academic success in the public 
sector. We wish Mr. Evans prosperity as a founder for Action-Oriented 
Leaders and look forward to witnessing his future successes as a 
torchbearer in the Sacramento Area. I thank all those involved with 
supporting our youth with the tools they deserve to thrive in life. Mr. 
Evans investment in our community and public service is not unnoticed.