I rise today to celebrate the 25th 
anniversary of Turner Industries pipe fabrication facility in Paris, 
Texas. Turner Industries specializes in innovative industrial 
contracting to fully meet client needs while prioritizing safety, 
efficiency, and reliability.
  Turner Industries was first established in 1961 by Bert Turner, a 
young engineer with an entrepreneurial vision. Over the years, it has 
expanded its presence along the Gulf Coast and offered additional 
services, including construction, transportation, maintenance, and 
steel fabrication. In 1998, Turner opened its state-of-the-art pipe 
fabrication facility in Paris with over 375 acres of space. Each pipe 
assembled here is precision-built to support power generation 
facilities, refineries, and petrochemical plants across the nation.
  For its outstanding work, Turner Industries has been recognized as 
the number one industrial contractor in the Associated Builders and 
Contractors Top 250 Contractors list. It has also been honored by the 
Construction Users Roundtable and presented with the prestigious 
Construction Industry Safety Excellence Award three times for its 
commitment to employee safety.
  In addition to serving as a critical energy backbone for our nation, 
Turner employs over 20,000 hardworking professionals across its 
facilities. It has invested in a new Operations Building at its Paris 
facility, which will greatly contribute to the North Texas workforce 
and community. I would like to especially recognize Mr. Chris Bailey, 
who serves as the Plant Manager and Vice President for Turners Paris 
operations. Mr. Bailey has dedicated himself to building and supporting 
educational programs in the North Texas community.
  I have requested the United States flag to be flown over our Nations 
Capitol to recognize this historic occasion and investment for the 
people of District 4. Congratulations to Tuner Industries, and I wish 
them the best.
I rise today to celebrate the 
50th Anniversary of the Bayou Classic, an annual football classic that 
honors the heritage and accomplishments of Americas Historically Black 
Colleges and Universities, specifically between Grambling State 
University and Southern University and Agricultural &amp; Mechanical 
College located in Baton Rouge, Louisiana; and, Grambling State 
University, a member of the University of Louisiana System Institution, 
is in Grambling, Louisiana. Southern University A&amp;M College, a member 
of the Southern University System, is in Baton Rouge, Louisiana.
  The Bayou Classic has earned the distinction of being the No. 1 HBCU 
Classic in the Nation, with a storied history dating back to 1932, and 
has long promoted the importance of sportsmanship, musicianship, 
community, and traditions by representing the talents and achievements 
of students, staff, and alumni of Historically Black Colleges and 
Universities.
  The Bayou Classic brings together fans and alumni of Grambling State 
University and Southern University and A&amp;M College from around the 
globe to New Orleans, creating a vibrant celebration of football, 
family, traditions, and pageantry surrounding Historically Black 
Colleges and Universities.
  The Bayou Classics core audience primarily consists of students, 
alumni, military personnel, and leaders from Historically Black 
Colleges and Universities, with age demographics ranging from high 
school students, college students, university alumni, and football 
fanatics.
  The Bayou Classic attracts participants from all over the world, but 
has a dedicated national audience, including but not limited to 
Alabama, Arkansas, California, Florida, Georgia, Illinois, Louisiana, 
Mississippi, New York, North Carolina, South Carolina, Tennessee, and 
Texas.
  The Bayou Classic has consistently achieved record-breaking 
attendance, with projections of sustained future growth, particularly 
the Battle of the Bands &amp; Greek Step Show, which draws an average 
attendance of 30,000 with sold out crowds for the past three years, and 
over 60,000-65,000 attendees for Game Day.
  The 44th Annual Bayou Classic in 2017 propelled the event to be 
recognized as the No. 1 HBCU Classic and the most attended football 
game in the FCS division, further solidifying its status as the No. 1 
HBCU Classic in the world since 2019.
  The Bayou Classic officially celebrated 50 years of HBCU football 
rivalry, in which Southern University defeated Grambling State 27-22, 
on November 25, 2023 in the City of New Orleans at the Caesars 
Superdome. The schools records are Southern 26 wins, Grambling 24 
wins.
  I am happy to recognize this event, held in Louisianas Second 
Congressional District, and proclaim the Bayou Classic as an historic 
event that showcases the excellence, pride, and unity of Historically 
Black Colleges and Universities. I appreciate all attendees from around 
the country and beyond who joined us in celebrating this momentous 
occasion, and to recognize the enduring legacy of the Bayou Classic, as 
we celebrated the 50th Anniversary.
I rise today to commemorate 
Pride Month and honor an LGBQTIA+ community leader in New Yorks Tenth 
District, Jan Lee.
  Jan Lee is a dedicated community organizer, activist, small business 
owner, and lifelong New Yorker. He is a third-generation resident of 
Manhattans Chinatown and has been organizing his community since the 
1990s, advocating for Chinatowns post-9/11 recovery, the reopening of 
Park Row, and representing the communitys interests with regard to the 
borough-based jail.
  For far too long, Manhattans Chinatown has not received the 
recognition, services and representation that its residents have 
deserved.
  Jans work has begun to change that. From his community activism to 
helping manage the apartment buildings that have been in his family for 
over 100 years, Jans commitment to his community is inspiring. Im 
proud to call Jan a friend and partner as we continue to revitalize 
Chinatown and give the community the attention it deserves.
Mr Speaker, I rise today to commemorate 
Pride Month and honor an LGBQTIA+ community leader in New Yorks Tenth 
District, Marquis Jenkins.
  Marquis is a community activist with deep roots on the Lower East 
Side, a lifelong organizer dedicated to building solidarity around 
issues affecting underprivileged Americans. He has worked at the NAACP 
to combat issues around criminal justice, he has directed organizing at 
WE ACT to advance issues of environmental justice, and he is currently 
director of organizing at Common Justice, a nonprofit dedicated to 
advancing solutions to violence and addressing issues in our criminal 
justice system. Marquis has never forgotten the NYCHA public housing 
complexes where he grew up, and first entered activism at the age of 17 
when he ran for resident association president at Bricetti Plaza.
  Marquiss dedication to the Lower East Side is evident to everyone 
who knows him, and our district is lucky to get to call him ours. I 
thank Marquis.
I rise today to extend my congratulations 
and honor A Tribe for Jazz for receiving the Battelle Central Ohio STEM 
Grant for their innovative Jazz Lab Mobile Pilot Initiative in 
partnership with COSI, the PAST Foundation, and Columbus Department of 
Recreation and Parks.
  Since its establishment in 2021, A Tribe for Jazz has not only been a 
beacon of cultural enrichment and social impact, but also a catalyst 
for change in our community. Through a multifaceted mission that 
includes visual storytelling, live and virtual performances, education, 
and community engagement, the organization has consistently championed 
the preservation and evolution of Jazz, leaving an indelible mark on 
our cultural landscape.
  The Jazz Lab is a mobile pop-up session uniting jazz music and 
science through immersive experiences that nurture curiosity, 
inclusivity, collaboration, and wonder. The pilot program for middle 
and elementary school students explores systems thinking in jazz 
through technology, engineering, and math, highlighting the 
intersection of jazz and STEM. With support from the Battelle Central 
Ohio STEM Grant, students in Central Ohio gain enriched access to jazz 
and STEM education.
  The Jazz Lab Mobile Pilot Initiative is valuable for everyone in 
Central Ohio. It illustrates the possibilities for STEAM in all fields 
and everyday life. Congratulations to A Tribe for Jazz for bringing 
this extraordinary educational experience to our children.
Madam Chair, I rise today in support of the 
inclusion of a pilot program for a national simulation-based emergency 
preparedness network in the Fiscal Year 2025 Homeland Security 
Appropriations Act. This pilot program will support the Department of 
Homeland Security (DHS) Office of Health Securitys (OHS) mission to 
strengthen the Nations health security through leadership and 
partnership, a safer and healthier Department of Homeland Security 
(DHS) workforce, and optimal care for patients.
  I worked on this language with my fellow co-chairs of the Modeling 
and Simulation Caucus, Reps. Bergman, Sorensen, and Rutherford and am 
pleased to see it included.
  The simulation-based emergency preparedness network will deliver 
simulation-based training that meets existing and emerging local and 
regional needs to licensed healthcare professionals, first responders, 
and volunteers. This network supports all five phases of emergency 
management by ensuring our vital healthcare workforce is prepared prior 
to an emergency, able to respond effectively, save lives, prevent 
further damage, and contribute to healing during recovery. The program 
will also serve the training needs of the greater U.S. healthcare 
system.
  Unfortunately, the underlying appropriations bill fails to invest in 
other national needs. It fails to fund effective strategies to keep our 
communities safe, much needed programs to

assist migrants, and critical programs to combat public health threats. 
The bill also limits the ability of the department to counter 
misinformation, meet cybersecurity needs, and bans abortion services 
for individuals in U.S. Immigrations and Customs Enforcement (ICE) 
custody. I urge my colleagues to maintain this program to further 
modeling and simulation-based emergency preparedness network as we work 
towards a mutually agreeable funding bill.
HONORING COMMANDING OFFICER, COLONEL MICHAEL L. BROOKS CAREER AT 
                              of virginia
I rise to thank Colonel Michael L. 
Brooks for a successful three-year tour as commanding officer of Marine 
Corps Base Quantico.
  A native Virginian, Colonel Brooks thirty-six years of honorable 
service to our country began when he enlisted in the United States 
Marine Corps in 1988. From his first assignment as the operations clerk 
in the S-3 office at Camp Lejeune to his tour as the commanding officer 
of Marine Corps Base Quantico, his dedication to the Marine Corps 
mission is unwavering.
  Colonel Brooks has deployed to support various military operations 
during his career. In 1990 and 1991, he deployed in support of 
Operations Desert Shield and Desert Storm. He was then deployed to Iraq 
in support of Operation Iraqi Freedom II, participated in the July 2006 
evacuation of American citizens in Beirut, Lebanon, and assisted in 
operations Infinite Moonlight in Jordan and Inspired Union in Kuwait.
  Throughout his service, his commitment to his education and 
leadership has never wavered. In 1992, he was assigned to Officer 
Candidate School at Quantico, the very base he would lead thirty years 
later. Before finishing his tour with 2d Marines, Colonel Brooks earned 
a degree in psychology from Campbell University. In 2011, then-Major 
Brooks attended Resident Command and Staff College in Quantico and soon 
after was selected to attend the Army War College in Carlisle, 
Pennsylvania.
  Since assuming command of Marine Corps Base Quantico in 2021, Colonel 
Brooks has contributed to the bases distinction as the nations 
premiere training institution for the Marine Corps. His contributions 
will undoubtedly leave a lasting impact not only on the base, but on 
the wider region. He prioritized strengthening vital relationships in 
the community and presided over the installations $6.96 billion total 
economic impact, all while upholding the bases proud traditions set 
forth over one hundred years ago.
  Throughout his service, Colonel Brooks has earned numerous 
decorations including the Defense Meritorious Service Medal, 
Meritorious Service Medal (3d award), Navy and Marine Corps 
Commendation Medal (5th award), Joint Service Achievement Medal, Navy 
and Marine Corps Achievement Medal (3d award), and the Combat Action 
Ribbon.
  Colonel Brooks is the true embodiment of the USMCs slogan Semper 
Fidelis. I thank him for his tireless commitment to protecting our 
nation and commend him for the positive example his leadership has set 
for all of us throughout his long and distinguished military career.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in celebrating and 
thanking Colonel Michael L. Brooks for his steadfast and unwavering 
service to our country, and in wishing him the best as he takes the 
next step in his career at his last duty station in New Orleans.
on June 26, 2024, I was not recorded on Roll 
Call No. 283. Had I been present, I would have voted ``NAY on Roll 
Call No. 283.
  On June 27, 2024, I was not recorded on Roll Call No. 318 and No. 
320. Had I been present, I would have voted ``NAY on Roll Call No. 
318 and No. 320.
I rise today to recognize Judge Brandon Bell 
of Paris, Texas, and present him with the Congressional Patriot Award. 
Judge Bell has dedicated himself to faithfully serving our community.
  Judge Bell is a seventh generation Texan who was born in Paris, 
Texas. In 1999, he graduated from Texas A&amp;M University at Commerce with 
a Bachelor of Professional Accountancy. Judge Bell later received his 
Juris Doctor from SMU Dedman School of Law in 2004. He initially 
clerked for Judge Sidney A. Fitzwater, the chief U.S. District Judge 
for the Northern District of Texas, before being admitted to the Texas 
State Bar in November 2004. Judge Bell is licensed as an attorney and 
Certified Public Accountant. He began his lengthy legal career at Boyd 
Veigel and specializes in family law, criminal defense, and tax law. In 
2019, Judge Bell was elected as Lamar County Judge. In addition to 
presiding over criminal and civil matters, he is passionate about 
granting foster parents the opportunity to become the legal guardians 
for disabled children.
  Separately, Judge Bell is involved in numerous charitable 
initiatives. He previously served on the board of the New Hope Center 
of Paris and coaches Dixie Youth Baseball in his free time. He is also 
a member of the Roan Oak Masonic Lodge and the Dallas Scottish Rite. 
Judge Bell is a devoted man of faith, and he attends South Side Baptist 
Church with his wife, Amanda, and his two children. I commend Judge 
Bell for his lifelong commitment to serving our community and 
empowering foster families. His efforts have helped many 
underprivileged children find a caring and loving home.
  It is an honor to bestow Judge Bell with the Patriot Award for his 
exceptional service to the people of North Texas.
I rise today to recognize Mrs. Drusilla 
``Dru Wade Newman of Frisco, Texas, and present her with the 
Congressional Patriot Award. Dru has dedicated herself to faithfully 
serving our community.
  Dru is a fourth-generation resident of Frisco and graduated from 
Frisco High School in 1974. She earned her bachelors degree in 
secondary education from Baylor University in 1978. For over 45 years, 
Dru has been a fantastic community leader and passionate advocate for 
youth education. She worked closely with the Frisco Education 
Foundation to help provide students with scholarships. Furthermore, Dru 
mentored young adults at her church while being involved in local 
parent-teacher associations and booster clubs.
  In addition to her work on education, Dru has continued to be 
involved in charitable efforts in Frisco to help families in need. She 
participated in mission trips around the world to support humanitarian 
efforts and share her faith. Dru also worked with the Frisco Heritage 
Association to organize and fundraise for their annual Heritage Days 
event, which highlights the beauty and rich history of the city. She 
has a servants heart, and her generosity and kindness has not gone 
unnoticed by those around her. In her free time, Dru is an avid sports 
fan, and she enjoys cheering for the Baylor Bears. Along with her 
husband Jim, she attends Frisco First Baptist Church. I am proud of the 
work Dru has accomplished for our community, and I wish her continued 
success for many years to come.

  It is an honor to bestow Dru with the Patriot Award for her 
exceptional service to the people of North Texas.
I rise today to recognize Mr. Jim Randell 
Newman of Frisco, Texas, and present him with the Congressional Patriot 
Award. Jim has dedicated himself to faithfully serving our community.
  A fifth-generation resident of Frisco, Jim attended Frisco High 
School and graduated in 1975. Two years later, he graduated magna cum 
laude from Texas A&amp;M University with a degree in agricultural 
economics. In 1978, Jim married the love of his life, Dru, and they 
raised two children. That same year, he established Newman Real Estate 
to manage property developments around Frisco and became a certified 
Property Tax Consultant shortly after. For nearly five decades, Jim has 
worked diligently to support the youth in our community and empower 
them to be successful. He firmly believes that our Nations children is 
our greatest asset, and he has made good on his promise to ensure they 
receive positive guidance in life. Jim has mentored high school 
students while working with school bands, sports clubs, and school bond 
programs
  Furthermore, Jim is passionate about community service and the 
conservation of nature. He was a member of the North American Mission 
Board, the Texas Mission Foundation, and Christian Hands in Action to 
help provide disaster relief and humanitarian aid for families in need. 
Jim also served as a dedicated RA director at Frisco First Baptist 
Church for many years. For his outstanding work in community and 
business development, Jim was presented with the Micro Business Award, 
the Small Business Award, and the Developer of the Year Award by the 
Frisco Chamber of Commerce. In his free time, he is a devoted 
outdoorsman and enjoys hunting and fishing. I am proud of Jims 
contributions to our community, and I am sure he will continue to make 
a positive impact on the world around us.
  It is an honor to bestow Jim with the Patriot Award for his 
exceptional service to the people of North Texas.
I rise today to recognize Mr. Peter Burns of 
Frisco, Texas, and present him with the Congressional Patriot Award. 
Peter has dedicated himself to faithfully serving our community and 
country.
  Peter was born in 1960 in Kingston, Jamaica. At a young age, his 
family moved to the United States and settled in Brooklyn, New York. In 
October 1978, Peter enlisted into the United States Army Signal Corps, 
where he served in various leadership roles. His service took him 
around the world, including South Korea, Germany, Bosnia and 
Herzegovina, and Macedonia. In 1999, Peter retired from the Army and 
joined the telecommunications industry. He obtained his Master of 
Business Administration from the University of Phoenix and completed 
the Entrepreneurial Development program at the University of Texas at 
Dallas. In 2020, Peter founded The Bridge Delivery Service, which works 
closely with Amazon Logistics to ensure the timely delivery of packages 
for North Texas residents.
  At the same time, Peter is actively involved in numerous charitable 
and educational initiatives to benefit our community. He is a board 
member for the Frisco Education Foundation, Junior Achievement of 
Dallas, and Be In Health Foundation, where he leads efforts to improve 
youth entrepreneurship and provide scholarships for students in need. 
Peter is also a devoted man of faith, and he is the Youth Director at 
Friendship Baptist Church of The Colony. For his outstanding work, 
Peter was recognized as Citizen of the Year in 2014 by the Frisco 
Chamber of Commerce and named 2017 Person of the Year by Frisco Style 
Magazine. In addition, he was named as Friscos Distinguished Veteran 
of the Year in 2019 and received the prestigious Congressional Veteran 
Commendation. I am proud of the work Peter has accomplished, and I wish 
him continued success for many years to come.
  It is an honor to bestow Peter with the Patriot Award for his 
exceptional service to our Nation and the people of North Texas.
RECOGNIZING ELIZABETH BARRIE FOR HER SERVICE TO CALIFORNIAS 46TH 
                             of california
I rise today to honor the contributions of 
Elizabeth Barrie to Californias 46th Congressional District. Elizabeth 
started her career on the Hill as an intern in my office during my 
first year in Congress and, like many congressional staffers before 
her, takes great pride in being a part of this Chamber and this 
institution. Members are able to better serve out constituents because 
of the tireless and invisible work and support that our staffers 
provide us. For Team Correa, it has been an honor to know and work 
alongside Elizabeth.
  Elizabeth has dedicated herself to her role through countless late 
nights, through sprints in the Rayburn basement, and through many 
difficult conversations while advising me.
  Ive seen staffers come and go on to greener pastures, and I am 
always so fortunate to cross paths with an individual who still has so 
much potential. Shes an incredibly bright staffer with an even 
brighter future ahead.
  Though we are all sad to lose her, we know that she will bring the 
same work ethic to her new role as Federal Affairs and National 
Engagement Manager for the City of Los Angeles, where shell be able to 
wear her Dodgers shirt without fear of shame.
  Ive had the honor of watching Elizabeth grow into her role, and I 
will still never let her forget that Orange County is the best county 
in California. I am so proud that Elizabeth will return to her roots 
and serve the constituents of LA. Elizabeth truly believes in the 
ideals of public service, and Los Angeles is lucky to have her service.