I am honored to commemorate a historic 
achievement by the Texas Rangers.
  The Texas Rangers won the World Series for the first time in 
franchise history despite many setbacks and injuries along the way.
  On Friday, November 3, 2023, Arlington, TX hosted a well-deserved 
Championship Parade.
  As a Congressman for North Texas and a lifelong Rangers fan, I am 
excited to celebrate this hard-fought victory with the Rangers and my 
fellow fans.
  Achievements such as this dont happen overnight, and they take the 
support of families, friends, coaches, fans, staff and crew. It really 
does take a community. And the Metroplex should be proud.
  As a former professional athlete myself, I know the hard work it 
takes, day in and day out, to practice and work to win as a team. All 
while forging ahead in the face of adversity.
  They have shown that North Texans are champions, and we couldnt be 
prouder of what they all have accomplished together.
  Go Rangers.
I rise to commend the Emergence Health 
Network Veterans One Stop Center for their continuous innovation to 
expand mental and behavioral health services to El Paso veterans and 
active-duty military and their families.

  Emergence Health Network (EHN), the local mental health authority in 
El Paso, has a dedicated facility focusing on behavioral needs and 
services. The Veterans One Stop Center (VOSC) in Northeast El Paso 
provides behavioral health services and additional support to veterans, 
active-duty military, and their families. Recovery-oriented care is 
offered to meet the needs of veterans, thus promoting hope and 
encouragement.
  EHNs partnership with Fort Bliss has proved to be a tremendous 
benefit as an additional resource and support system for these 
individuals to solve the wait and intervention times for care. EHNs 
Veterans One Stop Center has the capability and resources to expedite 
these services to a much-needed population and can provide care to 
service members anywhere from two to five days of initial contact.
  Today, it is my privilege to honor Emergence Health Networks 
Veterans One Stop Center for the grand opening of their new facility in 
East El Paso and thank them for their ongoing efforts to help our 
veterans, active-duty military, and their families.
I rise today to celebrate and 
acknowledge a cornerstone of our community and a leading source of news 
and information in Northeast Tennessee and surrounding regions, WJHL-
TV. This year marks the 70th anniversary of WJHLs dedication to 
broadcasting excellence.
  On October 26, 1953. WJHL made its debut, serving as the first voice 
of television in Northeast Tennessee and the second station to sign on 
in our great state. It was the vision and determination of founders 
Hanes Lancaster, Jr., Hanes Lancaster, Sr., and Jay Birdwell that 
brought this dream to fruition. Nestled in the heart of downtown 
Johnson City, WJHL has since been a familiar presence, illuminating our 
homes with news, information, and entertainment each day.
  Over the decades, WJHL has been dedicated to informing, educating, 
and entertaining over 300,000 households, spanning not just our 
Tennessee counties of Washington, Sullivan, Carter, Greene, Unicoi, 
Johnson, and Hawkins, but also extending its reach to into Virginia and 
Kentucky. The expansive reach of WJHLs signal is a testament to its 
leadership and trust within the region.
  Under the leadership of General Manager Paula Jackson, the station 
has maintained its commitment to broadcasting excellence. Paula and her 
team of over 80 employees--writers, producers, reporters, technicians, 
and staff members--all play a crucial role in ensuring that our region 
stays connected and informed. Their commitment to integrity, fairness, 
and community service is more than admirable. For seven decades, the 
dedicated staff of WJHL has been firm in their mission to report 
accurate local news that is vital to our region. Their creed is simple: 
news that matters to you and your family.
  Throughout its history, WJHL has seen numerous milestones. For many 
decades, they have proudly operated as a CBS affiliate. And in February 
2016, they expanded their broadcasting network, adding ABC to their 
second channel, further adding to the content available to their 
viewers. However, it wasnt just in content where WJHL sought change. 
In the Fall of 2019, the station embarked on a new chapter, unveiling a 
state-of-the-art studio, certainly fitting for a station of its legacy. 
As part of the Nexstar Media Group, WJHL, which encompasses News 
Channel 11 and ABC Tri-Cities, is poised for continued growth and 
success.
  As they celebrate their 70th anniversary this year, I ask my 
colleagues to join me in congratulating Paula and the entire WJHL team 
on 70 years of broadcast excellence. May they continue to shine 
brightly, informing and uniting our communities for many more years to 
come.
I rise today to honor the service of Kellie 
Ruetsch, a constituent from Plain City, Ohio.
  Kellie is a regional operations manager for Superior Air-Ground 
Ambulance Service of Ohio Inc. She was recently recognized as one of 
Superior Ambulances ``Stars of Life. Every year, Superior Ambulance 
recognizes a handful of its EMTs for their exceptional leadership 
skills. An EMT since 1997, Kellie has devoted her life to helping 
others.
  Apart from being an EMT, Kellie is also a paramedic and a 
firefighter. Despite volunteering countless hours to her community and 
raising two children, Kellie has also found time to advance her skills 
and professional growth.
  In 2016, Kellie was offered a leadership position in which she 
immediately excelled. In 2017, Kellie obtained her EMS instructor 
license and completed Ambulance Service Manager training in 2022. 
Kellies colleagues and superiors say, that shes someone who leads by 
example, never seeing a task as below her station.
  Plain City and central Ohio are better places to live because of 
people like Kellie Ruetsch. I salute her service to our community.
on Roll Call No. 570 and No. 571, I 
inadvertently voted Aye. I oppose the Perry Amendments, and both votes 
should be recorded as Nay.
I rise today to pay tribute to an individual 
whose unwavering dedication to providing exceptional care to the most 
vulnerable in our society, Frank Romano.
  For over four decades, Frank Romano has been creating and nurturing 
several successful enterprises that provide essential services to 
elderly and disabled individuals. His notable portfolio includes 
skilled nursing, assisted living residencies, adult day health 
programs, as well as home care services and senior transportation.
  A graduate of Merrimack College and the Harvard Business School 
Program in Entrepreneurship, Frank embarked on his entrepreneurial 
journey at IBM in Boston where he worked for six years, interspersed 
with a two-year leave of absence to honorably serve our nation in the 
Vietnam War. Upon his return, he channeled his passion and expertise 
into establishing his first healthcare facility in 1972, laying the 
foundation for what has been a long career synonymous with dignity, 
care, and deep-rooted respect for the care of our elders.
  Frank has served on the Board of Governors for the American Health 
Care Association, the largest association in the United States 
representing long term and post-acute care providers. His contributions 
have not gone unnoticed, as he was honored with the Joe Warner Patient 
Advocacy Award, acknowledging his unparalleled commitment to senior 
care.
  On Thursday, November 16th the Massachusetts Senior Care Foundation 
will honor Frank at its annual breakfast. Today, Mr. Speaker, please 
join me in recognizing the many years of service Frank has dedicated to 
his profession, which will undoubtedly continue to inspire and uplift 
our community for generations to come.
I rise today to recognize the 
Pleasant Valley High School volleyball team for being undefeated and 
winning the AHSAA Class 2A state title.
  On November 1, 2023, Pleasant Valley High School defeated Sand Rock 
for the 2A state championship in straight sets at Bill Harris Arena in 
Birmingham.
  Pleasant Valleys volleyball squad won its sixth state championship 
in program history led by head Coach Dana Bryant, who notched her 559th 
and final victory as a coach.
, please join me in congratulating Coach Bryant, the 
Pleasant Valley High School volleyball team, students, faculty and all 
the fans. Go Raiders.
today I recognize the bravery and valor 
of U.S. Army Veteran Sergeant Joseph Drake, recipient of the 
Congressional Gold Medal and one of only 12 remaining WWII Army 
Rangers. Born on October 24, 1924, Sgt. Drake recently celebrated his 
99th birthday with family and friends at his home in Hawley, PA, where 
he currently resides.
  As the member of the U.S. House representing Hawley, in Wayne County, 
I am grateful to have this opportunity to recognize the courage, 
dedication and selfless service that Sgt. Drake offered in support of 
our Nation during WWII in April of 1943 at just 19 years old.
  Sgt. Drake honorably served with Company A of the U.S. Army Ranger 
Battalion and after training in Mississippi, Louisiana and England he 
fought in five battles in the European Theater, including the Battle of 
the Bulge and Central Europe. His outfit spearheaded the invasion of 
Europe by climbing the cliffs of Pointe du Hoc on D-Day on June 6, 
1944.
  Sgt. Drake proudly recalls Company A moving to relieve a Battalion 
from the PA National Guards 28th Infantry Division in Ardennes, 
France, during the initial German attack that led to the Battle of the 
Bulge. Sgt. Drake and his Company fought through Luxenberg, Belgium, 
Germany and Czechoslovakia until the end of WWII in 1945.
  Sgt. Drakes distinguished service has earned him many medals, 
including this institutions highest expression of national 
appreciation for distinguished achievements and contributions--the 
Congressional Gold Medal.
  Upon returning to the United States in October of 1945, Sgt. Drake 
was honorably discharged from the U.S. Army in December and started a 
family with his late wife, the former Lydora LaTournous, in Hawley. 
They were married on September 23, 1950, and raised two daughters and 
one son. Life gifted them with many grand and great-grandchildren.
  Shortly after arriving back home, Sgt. Drake joined the U.S. Postal 
Service and worked there for 34 years, 15 of which he was the Hawley 
postmaster. Hes proud to be the first person from Hawley, and without 
a political appointment, to have served in this position.
  Sgt. Drake was active in his community, serving as Quartermaster and 
Treasurer with the Veterans of Foreign Wars (VFW) Post 5823 in Hawley, 
founded by his late brother Robert J. Drake. He worked with the Mayor 
of Hawley and others to plan parades and carnivals. After the post 
disbanded in 2008, he made arrangements to have the post headquarters 
on Park Place turned over to the County of Wayne, for the Hawley Senior 
Center.
  Sgt. Drakes devotion to our Nation is evident in his exemplary 
military career, and I thank him for his service while wearing, and 
after hanging up his uniform. He truly embodies what it means to be one 
of the few remaining members of the ``Greatest Generation.
  Sgt. Drake is a true American hero whose commitment to duty and 
service distinguishes him as an individual whose character represents 
the very best of Pennsylvanias 8th Congressional District, and I am 
proud to be his Representative in Washington.