I rise today to recognize a decade of 
excellence at the Academy for International Disaster Preparedness at 
Florida International University.
  Over the past decade, AIDP has trained and graduated more than 500 
students in disaster preparedness, emergency management, and 
humanitarian response.
  These programs have successfully prepared students to work in local, 
tribal, state, and federal government as well as in Fortune 500 
companies and the private sector.
  AIDPs curriculum aligns with FEMAs Next Generation Core 
Competencies, focusing on four phases of emergency management: 
mitigation, preparedness, response, and recovery.
  Through hands on training, students, along with experts in the field, 
use the frameworks of the Incident Command System and the National 
incident Management System to experience complex, real-world disaster 
environments.
  FIU and AIDP are setting the standard for the next generation of 
emergency management professionals, and I am proud to recognize their 
service and leadership today.
I rise today to recognize and 
commend an exceptional young student from my district, Addyson Pannell, 
for being named Best STEM Student by Constituting America.
  Addysons achievement reflects not only her academic excellence, but 
also her passion for the principles that form the foundation of our 
Nation. By combining her talents in science, technology, engineering, 
and mathematics with a deep understanding of civic responsibility, 
Addyson embodies the kind of engaged, thoughtful, and innovative 
citizen our future depends on.
  Constituting America is a nonprofit organization dedicated to 
educating students about the U.S. Constitution and the importance of 
civic engagement. Addysons recognition as Best STEM Student highlights 
her outstanding contributions to promoting these values through 
creative, STEM-based solutions and projects. Her commitment to 
excellence and civic education is an inspiration to her peers and a 
source of pride for her community.
  On behalf of the 12th Congressional District of Texas, I am proud to 
recognize Addyson on this prestigious accomplishment. I am confident 
that her future holds even greater achievements, and I look forward to 
seeing the continued impact she will make. I congratulate Addyson on 
this well-deserved honor and for serving as a shining example of youth 
leadership in America.
today I rise to recognize an extraordinary 
institution in American journalism and Black history as the 
Indianapolis Recorder Newspaper celebrates its 130th anniversary.
  Founded in 1895 by George P. Stewart and Will Porter as a two-page 
church bulletin, the Recorder has grown into one of the most enduring 
African American newspapers in the United States. It has served as a 
vital platform for truth, justice, and community empowerment, 
particularly for Black Hoosiers, for over thirteen decades.
  From its early advocacy against lynching and for voting rights, to 
its courageous coverage during the Civil Rights Movement, to dedicated 
coverage of issues impacting the Black community and all Hoosiers, the 
Recorder has always championed fairness and equal representation for 
all. It has lifted up local Black institutions like Crispus Attucks 
High School and the Madam Walker Manufacturing Company, while promoting 
civic engagement and public health.
  In recent decades, the Recorder has continued to evolve under 
visionary leadership. From William G. Mays preservation of its legacy 
to Shannon Williams modernization of operations, and now under Robert 
Shegog, the Recorder has expanded its reach through digital innovation, 
multimedia platforms, and award-winning journalism--earning over one 
hundred honors in just the past few years.
  Today, with more than 120,000 weekly readers, the Recorder is not 
just a newspaper--its a living institution. Through initiatives like 
Recorder Charities, the JAWS youth journalism program, and the Minority 
Business Review, it continues to invest in the future of media and 
enrich civic life in Indiana.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in honoring the 
Indianapolis Recorder Newspaper on its 130th anniversary. May the 
Recorders legacy of truth, service, and advocacy continue to inspire 
and inform for generations to come.
I rise today to honor the incredible life of 
Joe Moore. who passed away in late March at the age of 90. Moore lived 
a life dedicated to agriculture. I, along with many other current and 
former Tennessee FFA members, consider him to be a mentor, a role 
model, and indeed a hero.
  The Time Magazine cover was published after he was named the FFA Star 
Farmer of America in 1955. Appearing in the October 24, 1955, issue, it 
shows a 21-year-old Joe Moore, the only active FFA member to make 
TIMEs cover.
  At the FFA convention that year, judges were impressed by his farming 
operation conducted in Jackson County, Tennessee, which I am honored to 
represent today. He had a net worth of $37,000 at the time--a great 
deal for someone his age in the mid-1950s. At that time, he was farming 
505 arches, 85 of which he owned personally.
  I often say farmers are our Nations original conservationists. Joe 
Moore is a shining example of why I believe that to be true. The TIME 
article noted how he incorporated modern farming techniques to combat 
erosion and improve soil health. He carefully monitored the diet of his 
livestock to keep them healthy. He showed great attention to detail and 
inspected his animals closely, which enabled him to detect any health 
issues early.
  Over the years, his family farm has taken a bit of a beating. Very 
little care was taken to where row crops went into the ground. No 
remedies for erosion had been taken. But Joe was determined to restore 
the land to richness. He tackled years of abuse and the less-than-ideal 
terrain, arguing that his rocky slopes could be as fertile as flat land 
with the right amount of care. The article even says Joe viewed 
misfortune as a test of faith.
He was the owner and 
operator of the Upper Cumberland Oil Company in Cookeville,

which sold and distributed Texaco petroleum products for almost 30 
years.
  He also believed in giving back. He was one of the founders of the 
Granville Museum in his home community and served on its Board of 
Directors. He also served as an elder of the Liberty Church of Christ 
and was a longtime supporter of FFA in Tennessee.
  He is survived by his wife of more than 68 years, Ann, along with a 
son, a daughter-in-law, and two grandchildren.
  I want to end, Mr. Speaker, with a quote from Moore from 1955, 
``farming is the closest thing to the Lord you can do. I could not 
agree with him more.
I was not present for votes on June 10, 
2025. Had I been present, I would have voted NAY on Roll Call No. 162 
and NAY on Roll Call No. 163.
I rise today to recognize and congratulate 
Amanda Barlow, for the 30 years of service she has given to the Federal 
Government at the Department of Health and Human Services 
Administration for Children and Families.
1994, when she joined the agency 
as a presidential management intern, and then as a budget analyst. She 
became the Director of Budget in 2009 and has served as the Director of 
the Office of Legislative Affairs and Budget since 2017. Ms. Barlow has 
also served in an acting capacity for several of ACFs executive 
leadership positions, including the acting ACF Commissioner from 
January to November 2021, and the acting Assistant Secretary for ACF 
from February to May 2017.
  Through her work overseeing a budget of more than $70 billion for 
ACF, Ms. Barlow has played a key role supporting the programs and 
services that provide critical assistance to vulnerable populations, 
including Head Start and Child Care services for millions of children 
and families, and the heating and cooling of millions of households 
through the Low Income Home Energy Assistance Program. Over the last 30 
years, these programs have helped millions of children and families 
achieve prosperity and independence.
  In addition to overseeing the 60-plus programs ACF administers, Ms. 
Barlow has also served as ACFs liaison to the Committees on 
Appropriations. She has been an indispensable resource to the 
Subcommittee on Labor, Health and Human Services, and Education. Her 
budgetary expertise and round-the-clock responsiveness has helped the 
Subcommittee to draft annual appropriations bills and emergency 
supplementals--for which I am deeply grateful.
  In 2024, Ms. Barlow earned the Presidential Rank Award for 
Meritorious Service, one of the most prestigious awards in the Federal 
career civil service, which recognizes members of the Senior Executive 
Service for a sustained record of exceptional professional achievement. 
It was aptly awarded and richly deserved.
  I thank Ms. Barlow for her tireless public service--which often 
included long days, evenings, and weekends--as she worked to ensure 
that critical economic and social services programs funded through the 
agency had the necessary resources to serve millions of children and 
families in communities across the country. Her talents and 
contributions will be sorely missed.
  I congratulate Ms. Barlow on a distinguished career and wish her the 
best in her upcoming retirement. I hope her retirement gives her more 
time with family, including her husband and two children, and much 
success with her community garden plot.
I rise today with a heavy heart to honor 
a tremendous young woman from the Texas 24th Congressional District, 
Ava Moore.
  Ava was an exceptional individual. She was a leader, a patriot, and a 
bright light in our North Texas community. From the first time we 
reviewed her application to the U.S. Air Force Academy, it was clear 
she was destined for greatness. Her academic excellence, leadership, 
and dedication to serving our nation stood out. Thats why I nominated 
her not once, but twice to the Air Force Academy. The Academy itself 
recognized her potential and asked her to attend the U.S. Air Force 
Preparatory School.
  Ava successfully completed that program this May, and she was home 
for just a short break before heading off to basic training and 
beginning her next chapter at the Air Force Academy. Our staff had 
spoken with her about her abbreviated summer break and could hear in 
her voice how excited she was to start a career in service to her 
beloved country.
  While kayaking with friends on Grapevine Lake, Avas life was taken 
in a senseless, preventable tragedy. Our entire office is heartbroken 
about her loss and grieved for Avas

family, friends, coaches, and teammates. I am grateful local and 
federal law enforcement took swift action to apprehend those 
responsible, as that was the bare minimum we owe to Ava and to every 
American family trying to raise children in peace and safety.
  I had the privilege of speaking with Avas father, a man of great 
faith, kindness, and forgiveness. Even in the face of unimaginable 
loss, he told me he was remaining hopeful and positive, because, in his 
words, ``thats how Ava would have wanted it. That tells you 
everything you need to know about the kind of young woman Ava was, and 
the family who raised her.
  They chose to honor her life not with sorrow, but with a coming home 
memorial, a celebration of how she stood as an incredible example for 
all those around her. This past week, Ava was laid to rest with full 
military honors, as family and friends gathered to celebrate her grace, 
dignity, character, and strength.
  Our Nation is at a loss with Avas passing. She was leading a life of 
service as a young woman whose dream was to protect and defend the very 
freedoms we enjoy in this country today. She was taken far too soon.
  May we honor Ava by remembering the incredible young woman that she 
was and may God bring peace to her family knowing that though her time 
on earth was cut short, her legacy and her example will last with all 
of us. We ask the Lord to bless and receive His servant, Ava Moore. She 
has come home.
I rise today to recognize E.J. Basler Co. 
in Schiller Park, Illinois.
  E.J. Basler Co., a family-owned manufacturing company, has been based 
in Schiller Park since 1957. The company was built on the core values 
of quality and customer service, founded by Erv and Anne Basler, 
children of immigrants. Now in its third generation of family 
leadership, E.J. Basler Co. is run by Dennis and Brian Basler. Their 
ongoing commitment to responsive service and high-quality manufacturing 
has supported strong, long-term relationships with clients and vendors 
in Illinois fifth district and across the globe. E.J. Basler Co. has 
achieved lasting success by staying true to its original values while 
evolving with current times.
  E.J. Basler Co. offers precision machinery services that leverage 
different techniques, cutting-edge technology, and expertise to create 
the most cost-effective solutions for customers. They manufacture from 
iconel, brass, steel, plastic, and copper. Manufacturing is crucial to 
the global economy, and E.J. Basler Co. delivers high-quality solutions 
across industries, working with the best of agriculture, plumbing, 
automotive, industrial, defense, and medical companies. The close 
proximity to E.J. Basler Co. and its valuable services offer companies 
in Illinois fifth district a competitive advantage and drive economic 
development within the district.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in celebrating the 
longstanding dedication and success of E.J. Basler Co. I am honored to 
have such an exceptional company in my district.
it is a privilege to rise today to 
recognize Mr. Michael Goodwin for his service at Withlacoochee River 
Electric Cooperative (WREC) and his remarkable role in the Light Up 
Navajo Project. In May, a courageous team of 16 WREC employees traveled 
over 1,800 miles to the remote, rugged terrains of Arizona and New 
Mexico, where they spent two weeks installing vital electrical 
infrastructure for Navajo families who have lived without power for 
generations. Their efforts brought light, safety, and hope to 
communities long overlooked, allowing children to study after dark, 
families to preserve food, and elders to live with greater comfort. 
Despite daunting challenges and limited equipment, the WREC team 
completed a demanding project in just eight days--far ahead of 
expectations--demonstrating professionalism, humility, and unwavering 
commitment to this life-changing mission.
  The impact of WRECs work goes far beyond electricity; it represents 
a bridge to connection, opportunity, and the return of future 
generations to their ancestral homes. The emotional moment when power 
was turned on for the impacted families--bringing tears of joy and 
renewed hope--is a testament to the profound difference this project 
made. WRECs participation in the ``Light Up Navajo initiative 
reflects not only their technical expertise but also their heart and 
respect for the people they serve. Their dedication has energized ten 
homesteads and countless lives, creating a legacy of service that 
embodies the true spirit of cooperative values. The WREC teams journey 
inspires us all, proving that with compassion and teamwork, even the 
most daunting challenges can be overcome to light up lives and 
communities. I commend the entire team for their efforts on this 
worthwhile endeavor and for their ongoing service to our local 
community.
I rise today with deep respect and 
heartfelt appreciation to recognize the Orion Area Chamber of Commerce 
on the occasion of its 75th anniversary. For three-quarters of a 
century, the Chamber has played a vital role in advancing the economic 
well-being of the Orion community and fostering a spirit of 
collaboration and service among its members.
  Since its founding, the Orion Area Chamber of Commerce has grown to 
include nearly 350 dedicated members--each committed to enhancing the 
quality of life in the region and supporting one another in the pursuit 
of economic growth and shared prosperity. This remarkable network of 
business leaders, entrepreneurs, and professionals exemplifies the 
Chambers enduring mission: to build a vibrant, connected, and thriving 
local economy.
  Throughout its history, the Chamber has been a steadfast advocate for 
small businesses, providing valuable resources and opportunities in the 
areas of advocacy, visibility, networking, and growth. Signature events 
such as ribbon cuttings, community festivals, and live music nights not 
only highlight the exceptional talent and variety of local enterprises 
but also strengthen the bonds among neighbors, business owners, and 
civic leaders alike. These events serve as a testament to the Chambers 
unwavering commitment to building community through commerce.
  Moreover, the Orion Chamber has demonstrated exceptional dedication 
to workforce development by connecting residents with meaningful 
employment opportunities. Through job postings and partnerships with 
member businesses, the Chamber continues to support a robust and 
resilient local labor market--contributing directly to the economic 
stability and prosperity of the Orion area.
, it is with great pride that I recognize and commend the 
Orion Area Chamber of Commerce for 75 years of extraordinary service, 
leadership, and impact. Their tireless efforts to uplift local 
businesses and strengthen community ties have left an indelible mark on 
the region. I extend my sincerest congratulations and best wishes for 
continued success in the years to come.
I rise today to celebrate Dr. Barbara J. 
Finlayson-Pitts who was recently recognized as the North American 
laureate of the 2025 LOreal-United Nations Educational Scientific and 
Cultural Organization (UNESCO) For Women in Science International 
Awards.
  Each year, the LOreal-UNESCO For Women in Science International 
Awards acknowledge five exceptional women from each of the worlds 
major regions. Barbara was selected from an impressive pool of 466 
nominees for her pioneering contributions in the realm of environmental 
science and atmospheric chemistry. On June 12, Barbara will join the 
additional four laureates at the UNESCO Headquarters in Paris, France 
for an official recognition of her groundbreaking research.
  Barbara embodies the very best of our communitys values through not 
only her consistent dedication to better understanding the world around 
her, but also through her passion for preparing future generations of 
researchers as a professor within the University of California, 
Irvines Department of Chemistry.
  Barbara holds a bachelors degree from Trent University, and both a 
masters and doctoral degree in chemistry from the University of 
California, Riverside. Barbara is a long-term resident of Big Bear 
Lake--and in her spare time--she enjoys observing Big Bear Lakes 
resident eagles, Jackie, Shadow, Sunny, and Gizmo.
  Heather and I thank Barbara for her years of service and significant 
contributions to the scientific community. I ask my colleagues to join 
me in commending Barbara on this monumental achievement.
I rise today to recognize the distinguished 
career and dedicated service of Chief Master Sergeant Sharma J. Haynes 
on the occasion of her retirement from the United States Air Force. 
Chief Master Sergeant Haynes has served our Nation with unwavering 
commitment for over two decades, leaving an indelible mark on both the 
Air Force and Space Force.
  Chief Master Sergeant Haynes served as the Senior Enlisted Airman for 
Space Base Delta 2 at Buckley Space Force Base in my home state of 
Colorado. In this crucial role, she was the principal advisor to the 
installation commander, overseeing the morale, welfare, training, 
climate, readiness, and professional development of over 1,000 
personnel. Her leadership was instrumental in ensuring the effective 
execution of critical missile warning and intelligence, surveillance, 
and reconnaissance missions worldwide. Moreover, she played a vital 
role in supporting the numerous wings, mission partners, and personnel 
stationed at Buckley, as well as the extensive retiree community.
  A native of Greenville, South Carolina, Chief Master Sergeant Haynes 
entered the Air Force in 2003 and quickly established herself as a 
dedicated and capable leader. Her diverse background in financial 
management included positions as Flight Chief, Enlisted Force 
Development Manager, and Superintendent, with assignments and 
deployments spanning the globe, from Japan and South Korea to 
Afghanistan and the Pentagon.
  Chief Master Sergeant Haynes commitment to professional development 
is evident in her extensive education, culminating in a Master of 
Business Administration degree and completion of numerous prestigious 
leadership courses. Her dedication to excellence is further highlighted 
by her numerous awards and decorations, including the Bronze Star Medal 
and the Meritorious Service Medal with three oak leaf clusters. She has 
also been recognized with multiple Airman and Noncommissioned Officer 
of the Year awards throughout her career.
  Chief Master Sergeant Sharma J. Haynes embodies the highest ideals of 
military service. Her leadership, dedication, and unwavering commitment 
to the men and women under her charge have been exemplary. On behalf of 
the Sixth Congressional District of Colorado and a grateful Nation, I 
extend my deepest gratitude to Chief Master Sergeant Haynes for her 
exceptional service and wish her a long and fulfilling retirement. Her 
contributions to our Nations security will be long remembered.
I rise today to recognize the outstanding 
contributions that Ms. Tyra Youngblood has made to our community in the 
aftermath of Hurricane Milton. In addition to providing countless hours 
of direct support to neighbors and flood victims, she helped coordinate 
the collection and distribution of emergency supplies, meals and 
donated services to help those who needed help. A truly selfless 
leader, Ms. Youngblood was a strong advocate for bringing in government 
and non-profit resources to aid in the recovery process.
  It is clear that Tyra Youngblood has made a profoundly positive 
impact on our community, and I am grateful for her service. May we all 
strive to serve our communities with the same dedication and humility.
I rise today to recognize the outstanding 
contributions that Tyrone Young has made to our community in the 
aftermath of Hurricane Milton. In addition to providing countless hours 
of direct support to neighbors and flood victims, he helped coordinate 
the collection and distribution of emergency supplies, meals and 
donated services to help those who needed help. A truly selfless 
leader, Tyrone was a strong advocate for bringing in government and 
non-profit resources to aid in the recovery process.
  It is clear that Tyrone Young has made a profoundly positive impact 
on our community, and I am grateful for his service. May we all strive 
to serve our communities with the same dedication and humility.