I rise today to honor a 
White Freedom Rider from Jackson, Mississippi, Dr. Peter Stoner.
. His selfless dedication to the Civil Rights 
Movement, particularly his role as a white Freedom Rider, significantly 
influenced the course of history, contributing to the passage of the 
Civil Rights Voting Act of 1966.
  Dr. Stoners commitment to justice and equality demonstrated through 
his role as a

white Freedom Rider, played a pivotal role in shaping history and 
leading to the enactment of the Civil Rights Voting Act of 1966. 
Despite enduring beatings, imprisonment, and defying discriminatory 
laws by marrying outside his race, Dr. Stoners unwavering 
determination has left an indelible mark on our Nations history.
  Beyond his activism, Dr. Stoners extraordinary actions include 
enduring physical assaults, facing imprisonment, and challenging 
discriminatory laws by marrying outside his race. His sacrifices, along 
with those of his family, are evident in their encounters with 
challenges, such as the denial to partake in the estate of Pearl K. 
Stoner.
  At the age of 83, Dr. Stoner resides in Jackson, Mississippi, caring 
for his wife, who is currently receiving care in a skilled nursing home 
following a debilitating stroke.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in recognizing Dr. Peter 
Stoners contributions to the Civil Rights Movement.
Janelle Dunn is the chief executive officer of 
True Health, a non-profit federally qualified health center serving 
low-income and underserved populations within Orange and Seminole 
Counties. Mrs. Dunn obtained a masters degree in health administration 
from the University of Central Florida and a bachelors degree in 
business administration from Loyola University New Orleans. She is a 
certified medical practice executive through the Medical Group 
Management Association, a member of Delta Sigma Theta Sorority, Inc., 
Leadership Seminole Class 32. and a proud wife and mother.
2012 when she was a 
center manager. She has held the roles of director of operations and 
chief operations officer before being appointed CEO amid the global 
pandemic in 2020. Under Mrs. Dunns leadership, True Health has grown 
from seven locations to nine, added two new pharmacies and an optometry 
and optical department, and acquired the Healthy Start program for 
Orange County to provide services for mothers and babies. Mrs. Dunn is 
an advocate for access to healthcare and believes in the innovation and 
implementation of creative solutions to existing challenges. As 
illustrated during the COVID-19 pandemic, True Health was the only FQHC 
in Central Florida to operate a monoclonal infusion center, which 
allowed patients to recover at home and avoid the hospital.
, including the 2021 CEO of the Year and 2020 
Diversity in Business awards from the Orlando Business Journal. In 
2023, True Health was honored as the Healthcare Business of the Year by 
the Seminole County Chamber of Commerce and recognized as one of the 
Top 100 Women-Led Organizations in Florida by The Womens Edge. In 
January 2024. True Health received the Humanitarian Award from the City 
of Sanfords Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Celebration Steering 
Committee.
Jessica Paul is a St. Cloud resident and local 
business owner, who advocates for the needs of all members of her 
community.
  As a lifelong resident of the Whitted Historic Community, the Paul 
roots run deep, in Osceola County. She is a phenomenal mother to her 
handsome son, Jase.
  Jessica works to unite voices big and small and has extensive 
experience connecting elected officials to pressing developmental 
issues facing the Whitted Historic Community, including environmental 
concerns that directly impact quality of life. Jessica serves on the 
Osceola County CDBG Citizens Advisory Task Force for District 5, 
ensuring every voice gets heard. She is also an active member of St. 
Luke Missionary Baptist Church of Narcoossee.
  Personally, she takes an active volunteer role in coordinating local 
events for the Markus Paul Foundation, which honors her late cousin, a 
hometown hero and NFL legacy. Jessica is passionate about making a 
positive impact on her community through this foundation.
  Jessica and her twin sister were showcased as part of Spectrum News 
13s Everyday Hero and a video spotlight series presented by Experience 
Kissimmee. The feature highlighted their positive reputation for being 
good neighbors and contributing to the well-being of their community.
  Jessica finds solace and joy by spending quality time with her 
supportive family. She attributes her unwavering dedication and drive 
to her parents, Larry and Karen Starke Paul, who taught her and her 
siblings the importance of hard work and compassion.
I rise today to honor Nina Plaushin, Vice 
President of Federal Affairs and Regulatory Strategy at ITC, the 
largest independent transmission company in the U.S.
  Nina is retiring after more than 25 years of dedicated service, 
managing the twists and turns of congressional and regulatory policy.
  During this time, Nina was known as a leader in the industry, always 
to be consulted for her expertise and deep breadth of knowledge.
  She has served various roles within industry groups, including as 
President of the WIRES Coalition, President of Americans for Clean 
Energy Board Grid Board and Chair the EEI Energy Delivery Executive 
Advisory Committee.
  Before her illustrious work at ITC, she served as Legislative 
Director for Congressman Thomas C. McMillen, another figure larger than 
life--quite literally.
  Ninas leaving a lasting legacy at ITC and on American energy more 
broadly.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in honoring Nina Plaushin 
for her outstanding career.
  Her retirement marks the end of an era of exceptional service and 
leadership.
  We wish her all the best in her well-deserved retirement.
Sol Ortega was born in Peru and migrated to 
Kissimmee when she was seven years old. Her parents, Esther Rivasplata 
and David Ortega, created a life in Central Florida where they 
contributed to the growing tourism economy. Her familys immigration 
journey and sacrifices inspired Sol to pursue a career in public 
service to give back to the community she grew up in. While she was 
young, she participated in community service projects through the local 
YMCA, becoming a mentor for Bookmark Buddies through the Education 
Foundation of Osceola County, and, while in high school, volunteered in 
Teen Court, a program to divert less serious juvenile cases away from 
the more formal Juvenile Court.
  During her time at Professional and Technical High School, she 
enrolled in the dual enrollment program where she attended Valencia 
College. Thanks to this program, she was able to earn her associate 
degree and high school diploma at the same time. She then moved to 
Gainesville, Florida, to attain her bachelors degree in political 
science and Latin American Studies--making her the first in her family 
to graduate from a four-year institution.
  During her time at the University of Florida, Sol advocated for 
immigrant issues and completed a fellowship in the Florida State 
Capitol. Sol then moved to Washington, D.C., to pursue an internship in 
Congress and worked in service of Floridas Ninth Congressional 
District, providing vital support for constituents, including during 
the aftermath of Hurricane Maria. Sol now works at the White House 
Office of Public Engagement, conducting outreach to the broader Latino 
community.
She will continue to work towards creating 
spaces for her community to be heard and represented at all levels of 
government, with the goal of building a better community.
Sonya Stalnaker is a Union commercial painter 
by trade. She started in 2001 as an apprentice and completed the 
Painters apprenticeship of the IUPAT in 2005. She has spent her last 
23 years dedicated to her Union, her family, and doing what she loves: 
painting and helping others.
  She has served in the capacity of shop steward on the job and part-
time instructor at the Painters apprenticeship. Working hard and 
coming up in the ranks, she served as Financial Secretary in Local 1010 
for the previous 5 years. She was the Commercial Paint Coordinator for 
the Florida Finishing Trades (Painters apprenticeship) from 2021 to 
2023.

Last year, she ran for President and won the election becoming the 
first woman President for Local 1010. In 2018, she was elected 
President of Central Floridas Chapter of the Coalition of Black Trade 
Unionists.
  She strides every day to teach, educate, and do what needs to be done 
to help make a difference in her Union, home, and her community. She is 
a selfless type of person that does all she can to be better so that 
she can continue doing the work that needs to be done, helping those in 
need and fighting THE GOOD FIGHT.
I rise to honor the 100th anniversary of 
Battery Council International or commonly known as BCI. In March of 
1924, 25 firms launched the National Battery Manufacturers 
Association--the group that would eventually become Battery Council

International. Since then, BCI has been the leading trade association 
for unlocking the potential of energy storage and supporting the 
commercial integration of essential products. BCI members are committed 
to safe, responsible battery manufacturing and sustaining the worlds 
most successful circular economy.
  The domestic lead battery industry is an American manufacturing story 
that should make us all proud to be a part of. The industry in the 
United States has more than 165 GWh of manufacturing capacity, 39 lead 
battery manufacturing facilities, over 250,000 lead battery collection 
and distribution sites, and 9 lead battery recycling facilities. Lead 
batteries have a nearly 100 percent recycling rate, an industry 
sustainability achievement deserving of our recognition.
  The U.S. battery industry powers roughly $8.1 trillion worth of 
domestic industrial economic output annually, or roughly 20 percent of 
the U.S. economy. Forty-eight million jobs are related to or reliant on 
the battery industry and related downstream businesses. And the 
industry continues to invest to meet the future.
  The batteries made by BCI members over the past century have powered 
nearly a billion vehicles in the U.S. alone--a staggering contribution 
to American mobility. Fifty percent of the worlds energy storage 
capacity is reliant on lead batteries, which are a particularly vital 
part of virtually every industry sector, including transportation, 
traditional vehicles, electric vehicles, autonomous vehicles emergency 
and remote power, data centers, telecommunications, and renewable 
energy storage.
  I am especially proud of the work of East Penn Manufacturing, which 
is the largest single-site, lead battery facility in the United States. 
East Penn is located in my former congressional district in Lyons, 
Pennsylvania, and employs over 10,000 people.
  The President and CEO of East Penn, Chris Pruitt, leads this 
important company with its remarkable workforce in our state, and also 
currently serves as the Chairman of the Board for Battery Council 
International.
  The battery industry continues to be vital for our economy, our low 
carbon future, and our manufacturing sector, as well as the many 
industries that rely on energy storage.
  I would like to congratulate my friend and BCI board chair, Chris 
Pruitt, as well as BCI President, Roger Miksad, and all of the members 
on the 100th Anniversary of Battery Council International.
I rise today to congratulate the 
Woodside High School Mens Basketball Team from Newport News, Virginia 
on becoming the Virginia High School Leagues Class 5 State Champions.
  On Saturday, March 9, 2024, the Woodside Wolverines won the Class 5 
State Championship Game against the Lloyd C. Bird Skyhawks with a score 
of 53-33. This is the second year in a row that Woodside High School 
has claimed a state championship title. Led by Coach Stefan Welsh, the 
Wolverines closed their season with a record of 27 wins and 1 loss.
  The Wolverines and Skyhawks battled throughout the first and second 
quarters for an advantage. At the end of the second quarter, though, 
the Wolverines went on a 9-0 run positioning themselves into a 23-15 
lead by halftime. The Wolverines then expanded their lead in the second 
half creating as much as a 23-point lead on their opponents. The 
Wolverines were able to defend this lead throughout the rest of the 
game and ultimately win the championship.
, I want to again congratulate the Woodside High School 
Basketball Team and thank Coach Welsh, the parents, and the entire 
Woodside High School community for supporting these students throughout 
the season. I wish them the best in their future endeavors, and I wish 
the program continued success.
I rise today to honor the life of Teresa 
Darlene McDowney, who passed away on Thursday, February 22, 2024. She 
was born on July 15, 1971.
  She was employed with the King George Sheriffs Office as an Animal 
Control Officer from 2013 to 2020 and was employed with the 
Westmoreland County Sheriffs Office at the time of her passing. While 
with the Westmoreland County Sheriffs Office, she served as the Animal 
Shelter Manager, Animal Control Officer, and Animal Advocate. In every 
position, Teresa was a dedicated worker. Even when she was not working 
with the Sheriffs Office, she would often answer text messages about 
dangerous dogs in the middle of the night and help the community with 
animal related matters.
  Teresa was often described as a sweet and kind lady, often assisting 
her family, friends, and the community. While Teresa was a genuinely 
kind and sweet natured person, she was also very straightforward--
leaving little room for misinterpretation. If Teresa said it, she meant 
it. She was a protector of her family and what was right.
  Teresa leaves to cherish her precious memory, her husband, Kevin 
McDowney of Colonial Beach, VA, and son, Nathaniel Pittman of 
Williamsburg, VA.
, I ask you to join me in celebrating the life of Teresa 
McDowney. May God bless her family and her community during this time.
on March 20, 2024, I missed Roll Call 
votes. Had I been present I would have voted YEA on Roll Call No. 92, 
and NAY on Roll Call No. 93.
RECOGNIZING JOE MISLINSKIS SERVICE TO OUR NATION AND THE 10TH 
                              of illinois
I rise today to honor and recognize the 
outstanding contributions and public service of Mr. Joe Mislinski.
  Joe Mislinski is as a distinguished graduate of the United States 
Military Academy (USMA) at West Point, Class of 1978. A trailblazer in 
his own right, Joe was pan of the inaugural class that permitted 
members to select specialties beyond combat-arms, choosing the Ordnance 
Corps. Notably, Joe became the first CSMA graduate to attend the joint 
service Explosive Ordnance Disposal (EOD) school, reflecting his 
courage and readiness for challenging assignments.
  Joe served with distinction throughout his active-duty tenure, 
including deployments in the United States supporting the Secret 
Service and in Germany with the Combat Engineers in the 3rd Armored 
Division during the Cold War. Joe exhibited unwavering commitment to 
national defense and global security, championing Americas priorities 
on the world stage.
  Following his military service, Joe continued to epitomize the values 
of Duty, Honor, Country as an active member of the West Point Society 
of Chicago. Over two decades, in various capacities, including serving 
as board member and ultimately president, Joe was dedicated to 
mentoring new cadets and fostering connections among West Point alumni 
in Chicago.
  Joe has also served as chair of my Military Service Academy Selection 
Committee for the 10th Congressional District. As Representative for 
the 10th District of Illinois, one of my most significant 
responsibilities is nominating students to our Nations esteemed 
military academies. Since my first term in the 113th Congress, Joe has 
generously volunteered his time and extensive institutional knowledge 
to assist me in interviewing and ultimately nominating our future 
military leaders.
  As Joe embarks on a new chapter with his family in Connecticut, his 
commitment to service remains undiminished, as he will serve as 
coordinator for admissions to West Point for the state of Connecticut 
Joes legacy will continue to inspire us all, underscoring the profound 
influence of one individual on our communities. Once again, I extend my 
deepest gratitude to Joe Mislinski for his distinguished service to the 
Nation, the 10th District of Illinois, his tireless efforts in support 
of West Point, and his continued commitment to excellence in all 
endeavors.
I rise today to celebrate Mrs. Amy Bush for 
her dedicated service to the Hanford community and to congratulate her 
on her well-earned retirement as Head Coach of the Sierra Pacific High 
School Girls Basketball Team. Mrs. Bush, a teacher at Kings River 
Hardwick Elementary School in Hanford, became the Head Coach of the 
Sierra Pacific High School Girls Basketball program in 2015. Under her 
leadership, the Golden Bears have won an impressive 213 games and 
maintained a winning percentage of almost 80 percent. Over the past 
nine seasons, the Golden Bears have also earned two undefeated Tri-
County Conference Championships and six East Sequoia League 
Championships. In 2017, the team won their first California 
Interscholastic Federal (CIF) Section Championship and advanced to the 
CIF Semi-Finals. Just one year later, Mrs. Bush led the team to victory 
at the CIF State Southern Regional and Division V State Championships--
the first in Sierra Pacific High Schools history. During her tenure, 
In 2018, she was named the Cal-Hi Sports Division V 
State Coach of the Year. Two years later, she earned the CIF Central 
Section National Federation of State High School Associations (NFHS) 
Coach of the Year and was nominated for Federations State NFHS Coach 
of the Year. This season, Mrs. Bush has been honored as the Tri-County 
Conference Co-Coach of the Year. In addition to her achievements on the 
court, Mrs. Bush has worked hard to ensure the Golden Bears are active 
in the Central Valley community. Over the years, the team has put 
together several donation drives to support local residents, including 
drives to support the families of fallen firefighters and police 
officers. The team also volunteers every year at the Episcopal Church 
of the Savior Parish Soup Kitchen. During the COVID-19 Pandemic, the 
team donated food items to the Kings Pantry to give back to local 
families. The success of the Sierra Pacific High School Girls 
Basketball Team is a true testament to Mrs. Bushs character and 
dedication to the program. While she will be missed as Head Coach, I am 
confident that her leadership will have a lasting impact on the Golden 
Bears for years to come. Mr. Speaker, I ask my colleagues in the House 
of Representatives to join me in thanking Mrs. Amy Bush for her 
dedication to the Sierra Pacific High School Girls Basketball Team and 
the Central Valley. I wish her a happy and well-deserved retirement.
I rise today to recognize the 
lives of fallen officers Allen Lee Harmon and Otis Lee Robison of the 
Lincoln Police Department.
  November 16th will mark the 50th anniversary of Officer Harmon and 
Officer Robisons paying the ultimate sacrifice while in the line of 
duty. On November 16, 1974, the two men tragically lost their lives.
  On November 15, 2024, the City of Lincoln will hold a remembrance 
event at Lincoln City Hall to honor the lives of Officer Harmon and 
Officer Robison.
, please join me in remembering Officer Harmon and Officer 
Robison and honoring them for their brave service and dedication to 
their community.
I rise today to pay tribute to a community 
leader and devoted public servant. W.B. Wilson--the ``Workhorse of 
Williamsburg County--transitioned from this life on March 15, 2024. 
His rich sense of humor, wisdom, and optimistic spirit will be sorely 
missed.
  Councilman Wilson dedicated his life to serving others. He was 
elected to the Williamsburg County Council in 1994 and immediately got 
to work improving the countys roads, many of them rural roads that had 
never been paved.
  W.B.s proudest achievement was improving access to clean water in 
the county. After his father died from kidney disease directly 
connected to unsafe drinking water, W.B. made it his mission to ensure 
others in his community did not suffer the same fate. As a result of 
various USDA grants and loans he helped secure, Williamsburg County now 
has abundant access to clean drinking water. It was through his efforts 
to improve the essential infrastructure of Williamsburg County and his 
various other talents that W.B. earned his reputation as a natural 
leader.
  In addition to his work on the Williamsburg County Council, W.B. was 
actively involved in the South Carolina Association of Counties, the 
Williamsburg County Billing Committee, the Community Emergency Response 
Team, the Hemingway High School band and athletic booster club, and 
many other organizations. He also served on the boards of various 
community organizations and volunteered as a firefighter.
  Left to cherish his memory are his wife, Verlena Dicker Wilson, 
daughter, P. Jeanette Simon, son, Andre Wilson, brother, Samuel C. 
Wilson and sisters, Fannie Smith and Valtricia Cunningham.
, I ask that you and my colleagues join me in celebrating 
the remarkable life of Councilman Wilson. Over the course of W.B.s 
long career of service, there wasnt a person in Williamsburg whose 
life he didnt touch. His decades of work improving the lives of the 
people of Williamsburg will resonate for years to come.