I rise today to celebrate Dorothy Amerson-
Law, who is entering a well-deserved retirement after fifty years with 
M&amp;T Bank. With her dedication to service and passion for altruism, Ms. 
Amerson-Law is a true pillar of our community.
  A born and raised Buffalonian, Ms. Amerson-Law attended Kensington 
High School, where she was a star athlete and discovered her passion 
for banking. She then secured a prestigious internship with M&amp;T Bank. 
Her excellence in relationship management and risk remediation earned 
her a permanent position within M&amp;T Banks retail branches.
  For five decades, Ms. Amerson-Law served as an Accounting Associate 
within M&amp;T Banks Finance Division. She worked in numerous departments 
throughout her tenure, including Retail Banking, Auto Lending, 
Installment Loans, Credit Card Processing, and Financial Controls. In 
recognition of her exceptional client service, Ms. Amerson-Law received 
multiple ``High Five awards.
  Beyond her professional work, Ms. Amerson-Law is deeply committed to 
giving back to her community. She serves as the National Vice President 
of the African American Resource Group and organized M&amp;T Banks Annual 
Juneteenth Festival. Further, Ms. Amerson-Law dedicates her time as a 
volunteer to numerous organizations, including Erie Countys ``Day of 
Caring, the Salvation Army, Edward Saunders Community Center, 
Delavan-Grider Community Center, and United Way of Buffalo. Ms. 
Amerson-Laws compassion and community spirit shone through in the 
aftermath of the May 14 shooting, as she played a crucial role in 
distributing food and resources to all those affected.
-Law has earned numerous accolades in recognition of her 
outstanding contributions to our community. In February 2024, she 
received the inaugural Dorothy Amerson-Law Legacy Award. This award, 
named in Ms. Amerson-Laws honor, was a testament to her embodiment of 
M&amp;Ts core values of Candor, Ownership, Curiosity, Integrity, and 
Collaboration. Additionally, Ms. Amerson-Law received the esteemed 
Black Achievers Award for commitment to overcoming barriers and 
embracing inclusivity. Ms. Amerson-Law is a loving wife of forty years 
to her husband, James, and a proud mother to her two sons, James and 
Jalen. She credits much of her success to the steadfast support of her 
family.
  Today, Ms. Amerson-Law enters a well-deserved retirement after fifty 
years of dedicated service. Please join me in congratulating Dorothy 
Amerson-Law on this incredible achievement and thanking her for all she 
has done for our community.
I rise today to honor 
Gilbert Garcia, a distinguished journalist with more than 30 years of 
dedicated service to the San Antonio community and beyond.
  A native of Brownsville and a Harvard University graduate, Mr. Garcia 
has made significant contributions to journalism, earning numerous 
awards for his insightful reporting on politics, sports, religion, 
music, and much more. He authored ``Reagans Comeback: Four Weeks in 
Texas That Changed American Politics Forever, and his work has been 
featured in the national anthology ``Da Capo Best Music Writing 2001.
  Throughout his illustrious career, Mr. Garcia has written for 
esteemed publications such as the Dallas Observer, Phoenix New Times, 
San Antonio Express-News, and Plaza de Armas--earning six Press Club 
Awards.
  Most recently, as an Editorial Writer and Columnist for the San 
Antonio Express-News, Mr. Garcia has provided readers with in-depth 
analysis and commentary on local politics, economics, and social 
issues, greatly enriching the communitys understanding of important 
local, state, and federal matters.
We thank him and wish him 
all the best in his well-deserved transition. Undoubtedly, his legacy 
will continue to inspire future generations of journalists, and we are 
immensely proud of him as he begins to write the next chapter of his 
life.
I rise today to honor the career of John 
Hemmings, III, who is retiring as Executive Director of the Ohio Valley 
Regional Development Commission, what we in Southern Ohio know as the 
OVRDC, after committing 33 years of life and work to the Commission.
  Starting as a Regional Planner in 1991, John has held almost every 
position within the Commission, serving as Executive Director since 
2008.
  During his time at the OVRDC, John lent his skills and talents to 
countless programs that helped revolutionize the Ohio River Valley, 
including a regional commission that coordinates a cross-governmental 
approach to improve the local community through infrastructure and 
economic development.
  As a Scioto County native, Johns commitment to the region has led to 
critical improvements in the lives of so many Ohioans. Working with him 
to advance the dreams and lives of so many has truly been an honor.
due to technical difficulties, I was unable 
to cast my vote on July 22, 2024.
  Had I been present, I would have voted YEA on Roll Call No. 358.
I rise today to recognize and commend the 
Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity, Gamma Epsilon Boule on the occasion of its 
40th anniversary, acknowledging its significant contributions to the 
Sacramento community and its dedication to the principles of 
leadership, service, and scholarship.
  Whereas, Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity, also known as the Boule, was 
founded on May 15, 1904, in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania by a group of 
professionals as the first African American Greek-lettered 
organization, dedicated to fostering a spirit of brotherhood, 
professional excellence, and community service; and
  Whereas, the Gamma Epsilon Boule of Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity was 
established 40 years ago in the Sacramento region, when its first Sire 
Archon John Wesley Hudson MD wrote a letter on July 27, 1984 stating 
that Gamma Epsilon Boule had completed its chartering ceremony with a 
list of members including fourteen distinguished professionals in the 
Sacramento metropolitan area of which two are still living today 
including Archon Dr. Eugene Spencer and Archon Judge Gary E. Ransom; 
and
  Whereas, the members of the Gamma Epsilon Boule continues to include 
an impressive list of local and national leaders representing a variety 
of professions, including the following: medicine, dentistry, health 
care, law, politics, architecture, engineering, real estate 
development, education, the entertainment industry and business; and
  Whereas, the members of the Gamma Epsilon Boule have contributed to 
the Sacramento community through its dedication to leadership, academic 
excellence, and civic engagement, and demonstrated exceptional 
commitment to mentoring youth, supporting educational initiatives, and 
fostering economic development, thereby enhancing the quality of life 
in Sacramento; and
  Whereas, this 40th anniversary provides an opportunity to honor the 
Boules remarkable achievements and the positive impact it has had on 
the Sacramento community fostering a more inclusive and equitable 
society. Now, therefore, be it
  Resolved, That the United States Congress extends its congratulations 
to the Gamma Epsilon Boule, celebrating its legacy of excellence and 
wishing its members continued success in their future endeavors.
  I ask that my colleagues join me in commending Gamma Epsilon Boules 
40th anniversary and wish them the best on their continued work and 
dedication towards improving the Sacramento region.
I rise today to honor a 
remarkable and resilient individual, Veraniece ``Nanny Vera Williams, 
for recently completing 50 years as an educator in Congressional 
District in Louisiana.
(Baton Rouge, 
Louisiana) in 1967. She attended Southern University and Agriculture &amp; 
Mechanical College, graduating with a degree in Business Education in 
1971. She also earned an English Minor from Nicholls State University--
1973--Thibodaux, LA. She later earned a Master in English Ed., 
Administration and Supervision from Southern University--in 1981; 
Nicholls State University--1982 Plus 30 Guidance Counseling-Thibodaux, 
LA; National Beauty School--1983 Cosmetology-New Orleans, LA, and was 
an Insurance Agent.
, 
where she taught English and Social Studies to 4th-grade students. She 
later moved to Henry Louis Bourgeois High School (HLB), where she 
taught Business and English. At HLB, Ms. Williams sponsored the Key 
Club of America, educating young students on the importance of school 
and social organizations.
  After 22 years at HLB, Ms. Veraniece moved to John McDonogh High in 
New Orleans, teaching Business and Marketing Education with an emphasis 
on Entrepreneurship Studies. In collaboration with Tulane University, 
a real-
life setting. During this time, Ms. Veraniece Williams went on to be 
recognized as an Outstanding Entrepreneur Teacher of the Year at Tulane 
University.
  Her dedication to educating young students included consistently 
managing and seeking the challenge of teaching and inspiring lower-
track high school students to succeed in strengthening business skills 
and writing abilities, including building life skills and motivating 
students to consider job career goals and higher education. She 
effectively used town meetings, group learning, role switching, college 
mentoring programs, field trips, and classroom business operations to 
motivate students to learn. She also developed student-run businesses 
inside the classroom. She worked to build interview skills in 
preparation for work experience, providing job shadowing programs for 
students, and supervised several clubs in which students participated 
to introduce reading strategies in teaching literature.
  Her experience included CEO/Owner of Vocational/Career School; 
developing a marketing/entrepreneurship program for high school 
students; assessment teacher/mentor teacher for the State of Louisiana; 
Outstanding Entrepreneurship Teacher for Academies of Entrepreneurship 
Teacher (High School); High School Programs Teacher (Tulane University) 
Developed Curriculum program for Failing High Schools (Chair); State 
Team: Improving Best Practices for teachers at High School Level; 
sponsor of (Key Club, Marketing Club, Future Business Leaders of 
America and Yearbook); and Teacher of the High School Yearbook Program. 
She is the founder of PI 3.14 Inc. (Through which ``The Turn-Around 
Kids Club was created) and CEO of Act Too Travel Inc., Serving as the 
CEO of a Cosmetology School and Mortgage Loan Originator (State of 
Louisiana), as well as a Supervisor Federal Credit Union and CEO/La Rue 
Esplanade Bed &amp; Breakfast--New Orleans, LA Over All Business, and Co-
Chair ``The Celebration of Women.
  Her professional associations include the National Education 
Association and the National Collation of Black Women membership.
  I am so honored to have witnessed her courageous efforts during my 
career over the years. So many peoples lives are forever changed 
because of the fight she endured during her lifetime. I thank Ms. 
Williams for all that she has done in her 50-year career.
I rise today to recognize National Zookeeper 
Week, which is celebrated from July 21st to July 27th, as we honor the 
dedicated men and women who care for our Nations diverse and 
magnificent wildlife while educating the public.
  As a proud representative of Northwest Ohio, home to the renowned 
Toledo Zoo, I have seen firsthand the passion and commitment zookeepers 
bring to their vital work. These unsung heroes play a crucial role in 
wildlife conservation, education, and the preservation of endangered 
species. Zookeepers work tirelessly behind the scenes, ensuring that 
animals receive the highest standard of care, from nutrition and 
enrichment to veterinary support. Their efforts not only enhance the 
well-being of the animals but also foster a greater understanding and 
appreciation of wildlife among the public. No one exemplifies this more 
than Laurie Dixon, Lead Zookeeper in the Aquarium at the Toledo Zoo who 
has dedicated her life to this work for the past 41 years. She shared 
with me that ``Zookeepers are passionate about their animals. So, we 
provide the best care that our animals need to thrive.
  I have loved my Toledo Zoo since I was a little kid. The Toledo Zoo 
is a great place to make memories with family and friends. Their work 
is essential to preserving biodiversity and educating future 
generations about the importance of protecting our planets natural 
treasures. Let us take this week to acknowledge and celebrate the 
extraordinary contributions of zookeepers across our country. They 
truly are the guardians of our wildlife and stewards of our natural 
heritage.