I rise to acknowledge the 5th annual Sojourner 
Truth Life Walk, happening this Saturday, February 17th, at Kingston 
Plaza in Kingston, N.Y.
  Truth was an advocate for civil and womens rights, abolition, and 
temperance. Born in Ulster County, NY, in my district, Sojourner Truth 
endured the brutal and violent punishments of slavery. In 1826, a year 
before New Yorks abolition law went into effect, she and her young 
daughter ran away to the household of an abolitionist family in New 
Paltz, New York. Truth became the first Black woman to sue a white man 
and win, after her son was illegally sold to a plantation owner in 
Alabama.
  Truth joined the Northampton Association of Education and Industry, 
an abolitionist organization, where she launched her activist career.
  In 1851, at the Ohio Womens Rights Convention, Sojourner Truth spoke 
powerfully about equal rights for Black women and her experience, as an 
emancipated Black woman living in America. Her speech moved audiences 
and captured the attention of many.
  As I commemorate her life on Saturday with the Kingston community, I 
would like to thank the organizers of the event, Black History Month 
Kingston, My Kingston Kids, Harambee, the City of Kingston, and 
Seasoned Gives, and all they have done to put this together. Their work 
has not gone unnoticed.
it is with a heavy heart but fond memories 
that I rise today to pay tribute to the life and legacy of an 
extraordinary woman and my good friend, Vicki Modell. Along with her 
husband, Fred, Vicki became a respected leader and fierce advocate for 
those diagnosed with Primary Immunodeficiency and their loved ones. 
Though she will no longer be a daily presence in our lives, those 
fortunate enough to have known and worked with her will most certainly 
carry on her legacy.
  In 1986, Vicki and Fred Modell lost their only son, Jeffrey, to 
Primary Immunodeficiency, a genetic disorder that leaves the body 
unable to fight off infections. Not long after their son passed away, 
the Modells created the Jeffrey Modell Foundation--not to commemorate 
Jeffreys death, but rather to celebrate his life by giving life to 
others who suffer from the same illness. Today, the Foundation is a 
global organization devoted to early and precise diagnosis, meaningful 
treatments, and research toward a cure. Vicki was the heart and soul of 
the Foundation, and its continued mission to meet its ultimate goal--to 
find a cure--is her legacy.
  I first met Vicki and Fred when they came to me to advocate for 
increased federal investments in research of Primary Immunodeficiency. 
From our very first meeting, I was impressed, not only with their 
determination but their passion. They transformed the devastating loss 
of their child into a lifelong advocacy effort. Today, the Jeffrey 
Modell Foundation is recognized as a respected voice for advocacy, 
education, and research. I could not be more proud of the work we have 
done together to ensure federal investments in this critical work.
  In one of many remembrances, Vickis family recounted the story of 
Jeffrey asking his parents to ``do something. Through her work at the 
Foundation and her unwavering advocacy, that was just what Vicki did. 
Whenever faced with challenges or obstacles, Vicki never took no for an 
answer--she just kept going. In doing so she made such a difference in 
peoples lives. One of her favorite programs, Roots &amp; Wings, provides 
lifesaving travel and related support to families whose child has

been identified with a potentially life-threatening Primary 
Immunodeficiency requiring lifesaving medical care far away from home. 
Jeffrey asked Vicki to ``Do Something, and she did.
  As I stand today and extend my heartfelt condolences to Vickis 
husband, Fred, as well as her family, friends, and colleagues, I am 
inspired to continue to work with them and the Jeffrey Modell 
Foundation to honor Vickis memory by making a difference in the lives 
of those diagnosed with Primary Immunodeficiency and their loved ones. 
I look forward to the day when we realize her ultimate dream of finding 
a cure. I know I, like so many others, will keep the memory of Vicki 
Modell close as we continue this important work.
I rise to honor N. Scott Momaday 
for his remarkable and unforgettable life, a legend to the last word. 
, January 24 in Santa Fe, New 
Mexico at the age of 89. I offer my sincerest condolences to his 
family. They are in my prayers to find peace and healing.
, Oklahoma on February 27, 1934. After 
moving to Arizona, his family moved to Jemez Pueblo, New Mexico, also 
known as Walatowa--meaning the ``people of the valley. There is no 
surprise in my mind as to why N. Scott Momaday was inspired by this 
beautiful place, which was often featured in his brilliant works.
  Indeed, Mr. Momaday received the 1969 Pulitzer Prize for Fiction for 
his House Made of Dawn, which is largely credited with igniting a wave 
of modern Native American literature. He showed us the power of 
storytelling and the oral tradition--of bringing imagination to life--
and shed light on the Native experience and culture. As he once said, 
``Our very existence consists in our imagination of ourselves.
He wrote, 
``We Americans must come again to a moral comprehension of the earth 
and air. We must live according to the principle of a land ethic. The 
alternative is that we shall not live at all.
  Today I say thank you to N. Scott Momaday for these stories that 
preserve the beauty of our lands so that in a changing world, they 
remain indispensable to our collective well-being for years to come.
His writing sparked our imagination and took our hearts to 
places our bodies have never touched. He had the ability to paint the 
picture of a story through the finesse of power in his words. He 
created space necessary for creative culture to follow. For all this 
and more, we recognize N. Scott Momaday for his indelible influence on 
the state of New Mexico and to the United States of America.
I returned home to Green Bay, WI and was 
unable to participate in Roll Call Nos. 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, and 49.
  Had I been present, I would have voted YEA on Roll Call No. 44; YEA 
on Roll Call No. 45; YEA on Roll Call No. 46; YEA on Roll Call No. 47; 
YEA on Roll Call No. 48; and YEA on Roll Call No. 49.
I rise today to recognize Garrett, Indianas 
FFA Chapter as they celebrate 90 years of community service, 
leadership, and agricultural education.
  Agriculture is at the very heart of Indiana. Indiana has some of the 
best farmers in the nation, and America has the best farmers in the 
world. Perhaps no organization has had more to do with this than the 
FFA, which teaches the longstanding values of American farming to each 
subsequent generation. Farmers dont just cultivate the land and grow 
Americas food; they serve in other ways too.
  The Garrett Chapter of the FFA is an excellent example of this 
service on display. The students spend many of their days in Northeast 
Indiana giving back, showing up to community events, and advocating for 
farmers at every level of government.
  The Garrett FFA Chapter has experienced nine decades of often 
tumultuous history. Since its founding in the 1930s, its members have 
persevered and fed America through droughts, wars, and other perilous 
conditions. As such, the students who currently constitute this chapter 
are the recipients of an impressive heritage of Northeast Indiana 
farmers. They and their children can be proud to carry on this legacy 
for the next 90 years or more.
I rise today to recognize Mr. Jack Amoroso 
for his dedicated service to the Kings County community and to 
congratulate him on his well-earned retirement from the Hanford Police 
Department.
1974 to attend College of the Sequoias, where he 
played baseball. His passion for law enforcement was inspired by his 
father, who retired as the Deputy Chief of Police of the San Francisco 
Police Department. Mr. Amorosos career in law enforcement began in 
1979 at the Hanford Police Department, where he earned two stripes and 
was promoted to Sergeant. In 1988, Mr. Amoroso became the Swat Team 
Leader and Range Master at the Kings County Sherrifs Office. During 
his time at the Sherrifs office, Mr. Amoroso was awarded the Medal of 
Valor to honor his bravery while protecting the Corcoran community and 
was later promoted to Commander. In 2009, he retired as Commander and 
was sworn in as the Police Chief of the Avenal Police Department. 
During his tenure as Police Chief, Mr. Amoroso was steadfast in his 
commitment to reducing violent crime, leading the department to reduce 
the citys gang crime rate by nearly 80 percent. In 2023--more than 40 
years after he was first hired by the department--Mr. Amoroso returned 
to the Hanford Police Department, this time as its Interim Police 
Chief.
  In addition to his more than 35 years as a law enforcement officer, 
-Kings 
Counties Police Academy, where he teaches young recruits the skills, 
responsibilities, and dedication required of future Central Valley law 
enforcement officers. From 2017 to 2019, Mr. Amoroso served as the 
Academys Director. It is because of the dedication of public servants 
like Mr. Amoroso that our future law enforcement officers are prepared 
to protect our Central Valley communities. Mr. Amorosos dedication to 
his colleagues, his work, and his community is a true testament to his 
character and leadership. I know that his service to the Department and 
his commitment to the safety of Kings County will have a lasting impact 
for years to come.
, I ask my colleagues in the House of Representatives to 
join me in thanking Mr. Amoroso for his decades of service to the 
Central Valley and wishing him a happy and well-deserved retirement.
I rise today to recognize Mr. William Lynch 
for his dedicated service to the Kings County community and to 
congratulate him on his well-earned retirement from the Kings County 
Fire Department.
40 years ago as a 
volunteer firefighter for Kings County Fire Department. After a few 
years with the department, Mr. Lynch joined the Hanford Fire Department 
as a professional firefighter. He quickly moved up the leadership 
ranks, and was promoted to Captain in 1995, Assistant Chief Fire 
Marshal in 2004, and Deputy Chief in 2008. In 2011, Mr. Lynch was named 
Kings County Fire Chief following 24 years of dedicated service with 
the Hanford Fire Department. After his retirement from the department 
in 2016, he returned as the Fire Chief in 2020. Over the course of his 
career, Mr. Lynch has received many professional certifications by the 
California State Fire Marshals Office, including Fire Instructor, Fire 
Investigator, and Fire Prevention Officer. Mr. Lynch has served as an 
instructor of fire technology at College of the Sequoias, as well as an 
instructor of hazardous materials for the California Standardized 
Training Institute, where he teaches students the skills required to 
protect their communities from fire hazards and other dangers. 
Throughout his entire career, and in his many different roles, Mr. 
Lynch continually demonstrated his commitment to ensuring the safety of 
our community. Mr. Lynchs decades of service to his community serve as 
a true testament to his character and leadership abilities. I am 
confident the impact he has left on the Kings County Fire Department 
and the broader Central Valley community will be felt by generations to 
come.
, I ask my colleagues in the House of Representatives to 
join me in thanking Lynch for his decades of service to the Central 
Valley and wishing him a happy and well-earned retirement.
I rise today in honor of National 
Entrepreneurship Week. During Black History Month, I am proud to 
recognize and celebrate the achievements of Black small business owners 
and champion solutions that will build on the progress that has been 
made.
  Thanks to historic federal investments through the American Rescue 
Plan, the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, and the Inflation Reduction 
Act, Black business ownership is growing at its fastest pace in 30 
years and Black wealth is up 60% from prior to the COVID-19 pandemic. 
While we celebrate these historic gains, it is important to recognize 
the challenges that Black small business owners still face when seeking 
access to credit. According to the Alliance for Entrepreneurial Equity, 
Black-owned businesses are three times more likely to be labeled a 
higher credit risk than non-Black counterparts, and 72 percent of 
businesses use personal savings to overcome difficulties accessing 
credit from other sources.
  Business owners in my district have experienced these barriers. Che 
Houston, the ``Macaron Maven of Atlanta and owner of Che Rene 
Macarons &amp; More, has herself experienced difficulty securing financing 
for her growing business. Despite these challenges, Ches business has 
continued to grow at a rapid pace. Last year, she earned recognition as 
OUT Georgia Business Alliances New Business of the Year, and she 
continues to serve as an Ambassador for OUT Georgia Business Alliance 
where she assists new members in Food and Beverage startups. She is 
also a stakeholder with the Russell Innovation Center for 
Entrepreneurs.
  Here in Congress, I am fighting for solutions that will eliminate 
barriers that business owners like Che face when developing and growing 
their small businesses. And back home, I am committed to sharing 
federal resources that have been made possible through the historic 
investments from the Biden-Harris Administration. I urge my colleagues 
to consider additional solutions to help our entrepreneurs thrive. 
Together, we can champion solutions that invigorate our communities and 
strengthen our economy.
I rise today in recognition of the one-
hundredth birthday of Dr. Henry Stanley Zaytoun, a significant figure 
in the North Carolina orthodontic community and beloved father, 
grandfather, and grandfather. Henry turns one hundred on February 23, 
and he will be surrounded by his children, grandchildren, and great-
grandchildren.
  Dr. Henry Zaytoun grew up in New Bern, North Carolina before 
enrolling at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, where he 
completed his pre-dental studies. He subsequently attended the 
University of Maryland School of Dentistry. After graduating from the 
V-12 Navy College Training Program, Henry went on active duty and 
served as a Naval Dental Officer at the U.S. Third Army Headquarters in 
Heidelberg, Germany. Following his tour in Germany. Henry married 
Martha Nassif of Wilson, North Carolina, and practiced general 
dentistry in Rocky Mount, North Carolina.
  Henry returned to the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill to 
earn his M.S. in Orthodontics and moved to Raleigh in 1960 to establish 
his orthodontic practice, where he worked for the next 50 years. He has 
steadfastly supported the UNC Adams School of Dentistry over the years, 
co-chairing the capital campaign to construct the building that houses 
the school, establishing an endowment for a Term Professorship in 
Orthodontics, and establishing the Henry S. and Martha N. Zaytoun 
Professionalism and Ethics Award.
  In 2004, North Carolina Governor Mike Easley awarded Henry with The 
Order of the Long Leaf Pine, North Carolinas highest honor that 
acknowledges exemplary service to the state. He has also been 
recognized for his support for the arts across the state, even endowing 
an associate principal trumpet chair for the North Carolina Symphony.
  Henry is a beloved father to nine children, grandfather to 24, and 
great-grandfather to 15. He has made significant contributions to the 
dental and orthodontic communities in North Carolina and has led a 
lifetime of extraordinary dedication to the Wake County and North 
Carolina communities. I am pleased to celebrate his achievements as a 
community leader and philanthropist, and I wish him well in his next 
year of life.
I rise to congratulate the Fairfax County 
Fire and Rescue Department and the graduates of the 159th Recruit 
Class. As they prepare to join the ranks of the Fairfax County Fire and 
Rescue Department, I encourage the 19 graduates to reflect on the 
history of the department and the contributions and dedication of the 
brave men and women who have served before them to protect our 
community.
  The Fairfax County Fire and Rescue Departments Recruit School 
consists of an extensive and demanding 24-week program. In addition to 
two weeks of orientation, recruits completed nine weeks of EMT training 
and eleven weeks of fire suppression training. Upon graduation, these 
recruits will be certified at the level of Firefighter I/II by the 
Virginia Department of Fire Programs.
  These recruits have the distinct honor of joining one of the best 
Fire and Rescue Departments in the United States. The efforts of the 
Fairfax County Fire and Rescue Department have been recognized across 
this country. Members from the Department serve on the elite VA Task 
Force 1, which is among the first units called to disaster zones to 
provide search and rescue support. Members of that Task Force were 
recognized by the International Association of Fire Chiefs with the 
Benjamin Franklin Award for Valor as a result of their efforts in the 
aftermath of the devastating earthquakes that struck Nepal in 2015.
  Fairfax County is fortunate to have such excellent ambassadors for 
our community and I commend them for all that they have done to protect 
lives and property not only here in Fairfax County, but around the 
world. As the newest members of the Fire and Rescue Department, the 
159th Recruit Class graduates join the department as integral parts of 
our communitys emergency response and public safety team. I am 
confident that this graduating class will serve the residents of 
Fairfax County with honor and distinction. It is my great honor to 
include in the Record the names of the 159th Recruit Class:
  Michael F. Bookwalter, Blair E. Cerino, Christopher Chong, Antonio 
JP. Cipolta, Christopher N. Cognetta, Collin J. Fisher, Kevin J. 
Flannery, Joshua M. Ford, Imani Y. Gillen, Joseph T. House, Benjamin R. 
Klingaman, Jacob M. McCabe, Erick Mejia, Erik K. Muhlenhaupt, Nicholas 
D. Sirinek, Lloyd E. Turner, Jr., Joseph S. Uriarte, Ryan E. Victor, 
Mitchell J. Wadas.
, I ask that my colleagues join me in congratulating the 
newest members of the Fairfax County Fire and Rescue Department. I 
thank them for their service to their community and to all members of 
the Fire and Rescue Department, past and present, I say: ``Stay safe.
I rise today to recognize the dedicated 
public service of Chaplain Charlie Grant of Loudoun County Fire and 
Rescue.
  Before his passing on December 6th of last year, Chaplain Grant was 
one of the leading members of our community who was known for his 
dedication to others, integrity, and passion for helping those in need.
  Throughout his life Chaplain Grant worked tirelessly in his service 
to others. He filled his time working to help those in need and to make 
his community a better place. This is seen in the countless hours he 
spent serving the members of his community although he did more than 
just serve. Rather, chaplain Grant established many of the systems and 
programs still used to help people in our community to this day.
  Chaplain Grant was instrumental in creating multiple institutions in 
our community such as the LINK Against Hunger and the Good Shepherd 
Alliance which provides housing services for those in need. Further, 
its this desire for service and compassion for his community which led 
him to establish the Loudoun County Fire and Rescue Chaplains Program, 
the program for which he is perhaps most well-known, in which he was 
instrumental in providing support and services for the brave men and 
women of Loudoun County Fire and Rescue.
  This legacy of service will be fondly remembered in the community as 
Chaplain Grant exemplified the ideals of service, dedication, and 
compassion. The services and programs he established are being carried 
on by his successors. Even after his passing, Chaplain Grant is still 
watching over his community.
  I want to formally recognize the service of Chaplain Grant to our 
community and the Nation. He exemplified the ideals of service, 
charity, and compassion and has irrefutably benefited the lives of 
countless people of the 10th District of Virginia and our Nation.
today, I want to pay tribute to a 
remarkable civil rights leader and social justice icon, Thomas N. Todd. 
Although his name may not be familiar to everyone, his contributions to 
social justice and equality in this country are remarkable and have 
benefited millions of people in ways few others have accomplished. Tom 
Todd was one of the most electrifying speakers of our time. His 
impressive oratorical skills were so impactful that his initials ``T-N-
T became synonymous with the powerful effect he had on his audiences.
  Tom Todd was born in Demopolis, Alabama, in 1938. He later moved to 
Chicago, Illinois, where he married Janice Roberts. They had two 
children together, Tamara Nicole and Tracey Newborn. Tom lived in 
Chicago until he passed away on February 8, 2024.
  As a child in Demopolis, Toms family was poor. His father passed 
away shortly after his birth. Tom was raised by his mother and 
stepfather. Unfortunately, his mother also passed away when he was only 
20 years old. Due to his stepfathers illiteracy, Tom stayed in Mobile 
to help with the funeral and burial arrangements. He even considered 
dropping out of school to assist further. However, he eventually 
enrolled at Southern University in 1959, where he studied political 
science and earned a Bachelor of Arts degree.
  After graduation, Todd returned to Mobile and worked odd jobs for 
nearly a year until a friend suggested he apply to law school. Todd 
returned to Southern University for law school in 1960 and was admitted 
solely on the recommendation of a dean who met Todd as an undergraduate 
and recognized his potential. There, law professors and students 
represented other students who had been arrested for sitting at whites-
only lunch counters at five-and-dime and drug stores--an act of civil 
disobedience aimed at protesting segregation in Baton Rouge. Todd 
actively participated in the first lawsuit regarding these protests to 
reach the U.S. Supreme Court, Garner v. Louisiana (1961). He graduated 
magna cum laude and passed the bar exam on his first attempt in 1963.
  Todd then secured a position at the solicitors office in the U.S. 
Department of Labor in Washington, D.C., leaving that job in less than 
a year to train for the Judge Advocate Generals Corps. He practiced 
law while serving in the United States Army from 1964 to 1967. That 
same year, he was appointed an assistant U.S. attorney in Chicago. In 
1968, he made history by filing the first federal criminal case against 
a Chicago police officer for violating an individuals civil rights.
  According to United Press International, Todds case was also the 
first indictment in the country against a law enforcement official 
under a new civil rights amendment to the federal criminal code. 
Chicago police officer Joseph Fine was accused of beating up Eldridge 
Gaston outside a South Side restaurant. Gaston died as a result of his 
injuries. Although the case ended in an acquittal, the indictment 
itself sent shockwaves through the Chicago Police Department and 
political establishment.
  In 1969, Todd opened an office devoted to civil rights that became 
the countrys first local U.S. attorneys civil rights office. His next 
police brutality case would originate from a fight between black and 
white students at Chicagos Tilden High School, where police officers 
had allegedly beaten black students. A newspaper photographer captured 
one incident, which showed Officer James J. Gorman standing over 16-
year-old Roxanne Norfleet with his baton raised as she lay on the 
ground. Todd got that case to trial, but it ended in 1971 with a hung 
jury, though 11 panel members favored conviction.
  Tom Todd was admitted to many bars and courts, including the Supreme 
Court of Louisiana, the United States Court of Military Appeals, the 
Supreme Court of Illinois, and the United States Supreme Court. He was 
a distinguished black lawyer in the U.S. attorneys office--standing 
tall, fighting for police brutality victims, challenging the status 
quo, and prosecuting police brutality cases at a time when the families 
of murdered Black Panther leaders Fred Hampton and Mark Clark had filed 
civil rights lawsuits against federal, state, and Chicago officials--a 
time when it was almost unheard of for a U.S. attorneys office to 
prosecute a police brutality case.
  Todd received honorary doctorates from Grambling State University in 
1987, Syracuse University in 1990, and Wilberforce University in 1993. 
Between 1970 and 1974, Todd taught at Northwestern University School of 
Law, becoming the schools first full-time black law professor. 
Genuinely interested in seeing young lawyers succeed, he was known to 
use a lot of anecdotes, legal stories, and significant cases in his 
teachings.
  Todd was also known for helping to improve programs at historically 
black colleges in Louisiana, ensuring they were on par with other

schools in the state. Former Grambling State University President 
Joseph B. Johnson credits him for helping to secure $300 million in 
state funding that enhanced campus facilities and introduced graduate-
level courses.
  In the early 1980s, Todd became president of the local chapter of 
Operation Breadbasket and helped launch Operation PUSH, now known as 
the Rainbow PUSH Coalition. He advocated for social change and economic 
empowerment.
  When Harold Washington ran for mayor in 1983, Todd headed the 
campaigns speakers bureau and served as Washingtons surrogate. 
Because of his magnetism with audiences, he was often called on to warm 
up the crowd before Washington took the stage.
  Todd had a deep voice with a mesmerizing cadence that resembled the 
voice of James Earl Jones. His tone was powerful, fluctuating in waves 
and creating a fascinating rhythm. A Chicago journalist once described 
Todds speaking style as ``a deep, rhythmic growl that carried a sense 
of the Souths segregation history and the civil rights movement and 
conveyed a sense of urgency and anger about the present and the 
future.
  Todds booming voice got the attention of the iconic hip-hop group 
Public Enemy, who incorporated Todds voice as a powerful tool in their 
1989 song ``Fight the Power for the first 16 seconds and also used 
his voice to sample ``Revolutionary Generation in 1990.
  Todd is reputed to have delivered speeches at every historically 
black college in the country where he would encourage students to let 
verbs like give, serve, and help guide their actions but to lead their 
lives defined by nouns like courage, commitment, and compassion.
  Tom Todds journey was one of resilience, courage, and unwavering 
commitment to the principles of justice--challenging systemic 
injustices and uplifting marginalized communities. Through powerful 
oration and bold, courageous advocacy, he fought to dismantle barriers 
to equality, promote minority-owned businesses, and advocate for fair 
employment practices. Tom Todd transformed lives, empowered 
communities, and inspired a generation to stand up and fight for what 
is right. He leaves a profound and impactful legacy of lasting change 
that continues to shape our Nations path forward.
VIRGINIAS FOURTH DISTRICT BLACK HISTORY MONTH ESSAY CONTEST--1ST PLACE 
                  MIDDLE SCHOOL WINNER, FRANCES WIDMER
I include in the Record the following 
essay by 1st Place Middle Schooler, Frances Widmer:

       Shirley Anita St. Hill Chisholm did many amazing things to 
     pave the way for Black women in politics during her life and 
     legacy. Her childhood, experience in national politics, and 
     tenure as a congresswomen all speak to the remarkable legacy 
     she left behind. She paved the way for Black women to lead in 
     politics by pushing against the odds, by running against 
     white men, and by challenging the political system.
       Shirley Chisholm was born in Brooklyn, New York, but when 
     she was three she moved to her system parents homeland of 
     Barbados to live with her grandmother. She was an intelligent 
     girl and excelled in school and was ``bossy to all her 
     older cousins. When she was eight years old, she moved back 
     to Brooklyn with her parents. There she would listen into the 
     political conversations her dad would hold and she became 
     more and more interested in politics. She continued in her 
     education and went to Brooklyn College to study Spanish and 
     sociology, but she was not allowed to study political science 
     because she was a Black woman.
       As Shirley became more interested in politics, she attended 
     political meetings and joined the 17th Assembly District 
     Democratic Club. In her club, she realized that they did more 
     chores, like writing thank you cards and holding fundraisers, 
     than helping their community. Shirley Chisholm also began to 
     realize that the congressmen were making promises they could 
     not keep. Wanting to change all of these things, she got Into 
     action.
       In 1968 Shirley Chisholm was the first Black woman to be 
     elected to congress. For her to get to this point, she had to 
     face lots of opposition both because of her race and

     gender. Despite that, she knew that she had what it took to 
     govern our country. She won by over 21,000 votes, but not 
     everyone applauded Shirleys win. No one in the congress 
     looked like her. In Congress, her first assignment was a 
     position in the Agricultural Committee in America, but she 
     was disappointed. She then used her position to help feed the 
     hungry including people in Brooklyn, her hometown, Shirley 
     Chisholm said, ``You dont make progress by standing on the 
     sidelines, whimpering and complaining. You make progress by 
     implementing ideas. She kept trying and succeeded in her 
     goal.
       In 1972 Shirley Chisholm ran to become the Democratic 
     candidate for the Presidential election. She thought that the 
     U.S. government should reflect America. Though her bid was 
     unsuccessful, she broke the barrier for Black women in 
     politics. Chisholm was the first African American to make a 
     bid for a major partys candidate. She famously said, ``If 
     you dont have a seat at the table, bring in a folding 
     chair. She made an opportunity for herself and for others 
     to serve in government.
       Shirley Chisholm had many firsts: She was the first Black 
     woman to be in Congress and the first Black woman to make a 
     bid for president in a major party. By doing this. she paved 
     the way for Black women to serve in government. Rep. Lee 
     said, ``Ms. Chisholms mission to include women, children, 
     African-Americans, and other minorities in public policy 
     opened the door to a whole new debate lacking in Congress 
     during that time. She is a remarkable woman who paved the way 
     for many of us . . .