I rise today to recognize the 25th 
Anniversary of Charter Schools USA and its President and CEO, Jonathan 
Hage.
, opening the first charter school 
in the state. He has diligently worked with legislative representatives 
on both sides of the aisle to create equitable student learning 
opportunities. He has provided high-quality educational options for 
more than 95,000 students in Florida, Louisiana, Georgia, South 
Carolina, and North Carolina.
  Furthermore, Mr. Hage is a veteran who served in the Army Special 
Forces as a Green Beret. He is committed to supporting the military 
community through hiring practices that recruit, maintain, and promote 
veterans from all military branches. Additionally, where permitted by 
each schools charter agreement, students from military families are 
given enrollment preference. These commitments helped a Florida school 
receive the Florida Purple Star School of Distinction, recognizing 
schools that support the unique needs of military families and provide 
resources for military-connected students when transitioning to a new 
school environment.
  I am pleased to honor Mr. Jonathan Hage and Charter Schools USA for 
their continued commitment to student excellence by providing an 
educational environment that builds strong minds and good hearts to 
ensure a brighter future for all.
I rise today in recognition of Hermit Woods 
Winery and Eatery, a New Hampshire small business that was recently 
nominated to the 2023 Americas Top Small Business Summit. For 13 years 
Hermit Woods Winery and Eatery has embodied our states values of 
determination and innovation, heightened consumer experiences with 
high-quality, locally-sourced products. This recent recognition by the 
U.S. Chamber of Commerce is a testament to Hermit Woods Winery and 
Eaterys impact on our local economy and involvement in the community. 
The next generation of New Hampshire business leaders will look to 
Hermit Woods for inspiration.
  Hermit Woods is an industry leader and a trusted community partner. 
Its model of brewing with the fruits, flowers, and vegetables grown by 
local farmers and foragers showcases its culinary creativity and 
commitment to fostering community connections. Each bottle at the 
Winery is brewed with the spirit of community that defines the work at 
Hermit Woods. The Granite State is thankful for these small businesses 
that provide quality products, build relationships between neighbors, 
and strengthen the economy.
  I look forward to seeing all that Hermit Woods accomplishes in the 
years to come, and I am confident that it will continue to serve as a 
guide for other business leaders in the state. On behalf of the 
constituents of New Hampshires First Congressional District, I applaud 
Hermit Woods for its commitment to the values of business innovation 
and community compassion. I wish Hermit Woods continued success in its 
future endeavors.
I rise to congratulate Mrs. Eileen 
Thrall on being named Dumfries, Virginias 2023 Living Legend by Mayor 
Derrick Wood
  For years, Eileen has served as an exemplary member of the Dumfries 
community through her work as a reporter for Potomac News, where she 
authored the widely enjoyed Dumfries Community Column. Her column 
provided insight into the community and highlighted the wonderful 
facets of the town, sharing with her audience what makes Dumfries so 
remarkable.
  Aside from journalism, Eileen has also dedicated her time to 
advocating for Dumfries and its residents through her various community 
and public service positions. She selflessly selved on the Prince 
William County Board of Zoning Appeals for over two decades, working 
for the betterment of her community.
  Eileen serves on the Board of Directors for the Good Shepherd Housing 
Foundation working to provide housing options to those in need and has 
been an advocate for good environmental stewardship through her 
leadership of Friends of Quantico Bay and her involvement with the 
Friends of Quantico Creek.
  Eileen represents seniors within the town of Dumfries, serving as an 
executive committee member on the Prince William Commission on Aging 
where she advocates for issues related to aging and caregiving. And as 
an active

member of the Dumfries United Methodist Church, Eileen has served in 
various capacities supporting the church and her community.
  Eileens love and dedication for the Town of Dumfries is clear, and 
the work she does on behalf of her community serves as a pillar of 
inspiration across Virginia.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in celebrating and 
thanking Mrs. Eileen Thrall, a Living Legend, for her contributions to 
the community and the Town of Dumfries.
I rise today to honor a 
breast cancer hero, Mrs. Rhonda Givens Boles.
  Rhonda Boles was born on March 1, 1972, in Clarksdale to Roger Givens 
and Jamie Sharkey Givens. She has two amazing sons, Preston II--a 
freshman pre-veterinary medicine major at Mississippi State University, 
and Matthew Jamison--a junior at Pillow Academy.
  Rhonda was a 1990 graduate of Greenwood High School and completed a 
Bachelor of Science degree at Jackson State University in 1994. She 
completed her masters degree at Vanderbilt University in Nashville, 
Tennessee. Obtaining both a Bachelor and Master of Science in nursing 
before becoming a board-certified family nurse practitioner. She is 
also a member of Delta Sigma Theta, Incorporated.
  Rhonda married Dr. Preston Boles of Greenwood after moving back to 
Mississippi from Nashville, and they have enjoyed 21 years of marital 
bliss.
  Rhonda has a love for her New Zion Missionary Baptist Church Family 
and has served in many capacities: as speaker, advocate, and 
facilitator for health-care discussions during the months of October 
and February, where she educated the congregants on breast cancer 
awareness and other health-related topics.
  Rhonda was named The Greenwood Commonwealths 2023 Mother of the Year 
in May. The title she proudly claimed was being her two sons biggest 
cheerleader who did not carry pom-poms and was often heard giving the 
quick retort when asked why something had to be done.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in recognizing a breast 
cancer hero, Mrs. Rhonda Givens Boles.
I rise today to honor the 
life and service of James C. ``Sam/Sammy Bradford.
  Sammy was born on July 11, 1942, in Memphis TN. Mr. Bradford started 
trying to make a difference early in the NAACP youth chapter. In March 
of 1961, he became the youngest of the ``Tougaloo Nine to desegregate 
the Jackson Municipal Library System. It was during that selfless act 
of service he created the concept ``You can recognize whats the right 
thing to do . . . because the right thing is rarely comfortable, 
convenient or popular.
  Sammy graduated from Douglass High School and began his freshman year 
in 1960 at the esteemed Tougaloo College in Tougaloo, MS where he 
studied music. His love for music and beautiful tenor voice is what 
joined him with the love of his life, his wife, Shirley Ann Faulkens.
  In December of 1969, Sammy married Shirley Ann Faulkens. They were 
married for 53 years and 10 months and had two children together, Ako 
and Pili.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in recognizing the late 
James C. ``Sam/Sammy Bradford for his dedication, advocacy, and 
sacrifices to the Civil Rights Movement.
I rise today to recognize the incredible 
accomplishments of the U.S. Air Force Airborne Laser Laboratory.
  Five decades ago, in the midst of the Cold War, the men and women of 
the ALL undertook a seemingly impossible task: developing a laser 
defense system capable of tracking, engaging and destroying incoming 
missiles from an airborne platform. Although the Air Force had 
successfully demonstrated their ability to use a land-based laser to 
destroy drone aircraft, the ALL would represent the first time in 
history that an aircraft-based system would attempt that feat.
  For more than a decade, Air Force scientists and engineers, both 
military and civilian, pushed scientific boundaries, working on a 
converted KC-135 tanker aircraft in a huge yellow hanger at Kirkland 
Air Force Base. These pioneers were not employing the latest 
technologies, they were inventing brand-new technologies as they 
discovered new challenges. Many of those new technologies are in use 
today, in both directed energy and kinetic weapons programs.
  In 1983 their hard work paid off when the ALL was successfully tested 
against AIM-9B Sidewinder missiles fired toward the aircraft in flight. 
Although the fighter aircraft firing those missiles were positioned out 
of range, any miscalculation could have been disastrous. Lt. Col Dennis 
Boesen, who was one of the ALLs Test Directors as well as a Vietnam 
combat veteran, pointed out, they were putting their lives in the hands 
of pilots, engineers and even the ordnance specialists to do their job 
perfectly. They put themselves in the path of a missile--five missiles, 
in fact--to prove a technology designed to save lives. Their faith in 
their fellow airmen, officers and scientists is a testament to this 
incredible team.
  In joint testing with the U.S. Navy, the ALL shot down a BMQ-34A 
drone representing a Soviet cruise missile. Again, the ALL performed 
flawlessly, destroying the drone and demonstrating that airborne laser 
weapons are possible. In fact, the technological breakthroughs achieved 
with the ALL helped inspire President Ronald Reagan to launch the 
Strategic Defense Initiative and lead several years later to the YAL-1A 
airborne laser system.
, as conflicts around the world show us every day, the 
U.S. and its allies are constantly under attack from new and more 
sophisticated enemies. If we are going to continue protecting our 
citizens and our allies, we need to ensure that our fighting men and 
women have the best technology possible. The men and women who worked 
on the ALL deserve our deepest appreciation for what they accomplished 
to keep this country safe and, as the ALL logo states, give us all 
``Peace Through Light.
today I introduce the Words Matter for the 
District of Columbia Courts Act, which would remove the term 
``retarded from Title 11 of the District of Columbia Code and replace 
it with more appropriate and respectful terminology. I am pleased that 
Representative Marc Molinaro is the co-lead of this bill.
  Removing the term from the law has bipartisan support. In 2010, 
Congress removed several instances of the term from federal law by 
passing Rosas Law (P.L. 111-256). Earlier this year, I joined both 
Republican and Democratic colleagues in introducing the Words Matter 
Act, which would remove several more instances of the term from federal 
law.
  The term is used three times in Title 11 of the D.C. Code, and, under 
the D.C. Home Rule Act, only Congress can amend Title 11 of the D.C. 
Code.
  There was a time when the term was a clinical term, but in more 
recent years, it has become a slur used against people with 
intellectual disabilities. Words indisputably matter, and I know our 
country is better than keeping such language in our law.
  I urge my colleagues to support this bill.
today I rise to honor Bruce A. Wilber, 
who has dedicated his life to serving both his country and his 
community. Mr. Wilbers journey is one of resilience, dedication, and 
unwavering commitment to those he serves.
  Born in June 1957 on the Menominee Indian Reservation in Keshana, 
Wisconsin, Mr. Wilber emerged as a beacon of leadership, being the 
oldest of seven children. His fathers legacy as a Korean War veteran 
instilled in him a profound sense of duty to his country and eventually 
inspired him to join the military. After answering the call to serve, 
Bruce Wilber became a motor transport operator stationed in Caserma 
Ederle, a base in Livorno, Italy.
  Upon concluding his military service, Mr. Wilber transitioned to the 
civilian sector, where he contributed to the logging industry and later 
served in law enforcement. Unfortunately, his law enforcement career 
was cut short due to an injury. However, this setback did not deter 
him. Mr. Wilbers tenacity shone through as he pursued an associate 
degree in alcohol and other drug abuse (AODA) counseling from the 
College of Menominee Nation.
  His journey took a significant turn as he assumed the role of an AODA 
counselor at the Maehnowesekiyah Wellness Center, the treatment 
facility for the Menominee Nation. In this capacity, he was 
instrumental in establishing and maintaining mental and physical 
wellness programs for veterans and members of the Menominee Tribe for a 
decade. At each stop in his career, he continued to serve a greater 
purpose and those around him.
  In August 2016, Mr. Wilber became the Tribal Veterans Service Officer 
(TVSO) and a County Veterans Service Officer (CVSO) for the Menominee 
Nation and Menominee County, respectively. He extended his service by 
joining the Wisconsin County Veterans Service Officers Association 
(CVSOA), a vital organization that represents all 11 recognized tribes 
and 72 counties in Wisconsin.
  After several years as a CVSO, it is with great pride that we 
acknowledge Mr. Wilbers election as the first Native American 
president of the State County Veterans Service Officer Association 
(CVSOA). I am sure that with his experience and unwavering dedication 
to the veterans community, Mr. Wilber will excel in this new role.
, having celebrated 
30 years of marriage and having raised seven children. The Wilber 
familys sacrifices have been profound, including the loss of a son who 
served with the Marines in Iraq and tragically passing away in an

accident at Camp Lejeune, North Carolina. Mr. Wilber carries the memory 
of his son in his heart and draws inspiration from his sons legacy to 
continue being a positive role model for others.
  I am proud that my office has been able to work with Bruce in his 
role as TVSO and CVSO. It is an incredible honor to recognize and 
celebrate the accomplishments of Bruce as he continues to make a 
profound impact on the lives of our veterans, the Menominee tribe, 
Northeast Wisconsin, and our country.
I rise today to recognize Mrs. 
Mildred McKinney and her dedication to St. Thomas United Methodist 
Church.
  Mildred McKinney was born on December 12, 1945. She is the daughter 
of the late George and Lillie Oden and is the wife of Mr. Ralph 
McKinney. Her siblings are the late Carolyn Oden Jackson, the late 
Rudolph Halcome, and the late Willie Joe Oden.
27 years of service.
  She is a proud member of the Coosa Valley Medical Center Auxiliary 
and has contributed over 1900 hours of volunteer service to Coosa 
Medical Center in Sylacauga.

  She has served her church in many various ways. At St. Thomas, she 
has previously served as past president of the St. Thomas United 
Methodist women for 9 years, Sunday School Teacher, Sunday school 
superintendent, Church Secretary, Vacation Bible School Director and 
Trustee and has sung in the choir.
please join me in recognizing Mrs. McKinney for her 
dedication to St. Thomas United Methodist Church.
I rise today to recognize a school from my 
district, the Okaloosa Science, Technology, Engineering, Mathematics, 
and Medical (STEMM) Academy, on achieving the remarkable milestone of 
being recognized as a National Blue Ribbon School. Okaloosa STEMM 
Academy is one of only 13 schools from the State of Florida to earn 
this distinction and one of only 353 nationwide in 2023. This 
achievement is a testament to the teachers and staffs dedication to 
student success and their pursuit of excellence.
  The Okaloosa STEMM Academy is an innovative middle school that 
provides a free and public education to sixth through eighth grade 
students in Okaloosa County with a curriculum focused on academic rigor 
and excellence. The STEMM Academy was established in 2012 as part of 
the Okaloosa STEMM Center. The curriculum has been specifically 
designed to enable students to transition to high school having 
completed numerous high school courses, including Algebra I Honors, 
Geometry I Honors, Physical Science Honors, Fundamentals of Web Design, 
and Earth Space Science Honors. I am proud that Northwest Florida is 
home to a multi-faceted academy for students interested in pursuing 
STEMM careers.
  I, along with all of Northwest Florida, thank Principal Scheree 
Martin, the teachers, administration, and staff at Okaloosa STEMM 
Academy for their hard work and dedication to their students, families, 
and this community.
  On behalf of the United States House of Representatives, I am 
privileged to recognize Okaloosa STEMM Academy on this incredible 
achievement.
I rise today to honor an outstanding 
citizen, Mr. Barry Chastain, a remarkable individual who has devoted 
over 38 years to federal service. Currently serving as the Area Port 
Director for Customs and Border Protection (CBP) in North Carolina, Mr. 
Chastains contributions to the Carolinas and our Nation are 
immeasurable. In his capacity as the Area Port Director, Mr. Chastain 
shoulders the responsibility of overseeing six international ports of 
entry in North Carolina, where he manages a workforce of more than 150 
dedicated employees. These ports collectively process over 3.5 million 
passengers and handle over 4 billion dollars in imported goods 
annually. Under his vigilant leadership, the seamless flow of 
legitimate trade coexists with stringent security measures to safeguard 
our national interests. Mr. Chastain serves as the senior CBP 
representative to all federal, state, and local law enforcement 
partners in North Carolina. His ability to foster cooperation and 
collaboration among these agencies is integral to the safety and well-
being of our citizens.
His previous leadership assignments within the United States Department 
of Agricultures Plant Protection and Quarantine Division in North 
Carolina exemplify his unwavering dedication to protecting our 
agricultural and biological resources. He also served as the Officer in 
Charge in South Carolina and Eastern Georgia, where he provided 
leadership and innovation to shield our natural resources from invasive 
plant pests and foreign animal diseases.
, such as serving as the Assistant Area Port 
Director for Trade Operations and the Assistant Area Port Director for 
Passenger and Tactical Operations. In these roles, he managed 
international passenger clearance programs, trade processing, maritime 
and military clearance operations, and led all CBP enforcement programs 
for the Area Port of Charlotte.
-profile national projects, including the 
Democratic National Convention, the G-8 Summit, and numerous FEMA 
Region IV hurricane response events. His capacity to manage complex and 
critical tasks on a large scale is a valuable asset to our nation. 
Moreover, Mr. Chastain has excelled in establishing stakeholder 
partnerships and currently serves as an Executive Steering Committee 
Member of the North Carolina Joint Terrorist Task Force (JTTF). His 
contributions to this task force are crucial to our states security 
efforts. Mr. Chastains outstanding career in federal service, his 
commitment to national security, and his exemplary leadership in 
Customs and Border Protection are truly commendable. The Carolinas and 
our Nation are fortunate to have such a dedicated public servant. We 
extend our heartfelt appreciation for his remarkable service.
I rise today to recognize the University of 
Maryland Eastern Shore (UMES) for receiving its highest ranking for 
Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) according to U.S. 
News &amp; World Report.
  Under the leadership of UMES President, Dr. Heidi M. Anderson, U.S. 
News ranked UMES in the top 6 of public HBCUs, number 200 among all 
public colleges and universities, and number 14 among 78 HBCUs in their 
2023-2024 report. UMES ranked two spots higher than last years report 
and is the university highest ranking since U.S. News created its HBCU 
category in 2007.
  As the representative of Marylands Eastern Shore, it is my distinct 
honor to recognize UMES for its remarkable achievement and I look 
forward to seeing the university continue to shape the minds of our 
Nations future. Congratulations to UMES and Go Hawks.
Title IV of Senate Resolution 4, agreed to by the Senate of February 
4, 1977, calls for establishment of a system for a computerized 
schedule of all meetings and hearings of Senate committees, 
subcommittees, joint committees, and committees of conference. This 
title requires all such committees to notify the Office of the Senate 
Daily Digest--designated by the Rules Committee--of the time, place and 
purpose of the meetings, when scheduled and any cancellations or 
changes in the meetings as they occur.
  As an additional procedure along with the computerization of this 
information, the Office of the Senate Daily Digest will prepare this 
information for printing in the Extensions of Remarks section of the 
Congressional Record on Monday and Wednesday of each week.
  Meetings scheduled for Thursday, November 2, 2023 may be found in the 
Daily Digest of todays Record.

     10 a.m.
       Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation
       Subcommittee on Tourism, Trade, and Export Promotion
         To hold hearings to examine sustainable tourism for a 
           thriving economy.
                                                            SR-253
       Committee on the Judiciary
       Subcommittee on Privacy, Technology, and the Law
         To hold hearings to examine social media and the teen 
           mental health crisis.
                                                            SD-226
     2:30 p.m.
       Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation
         To hold hearings to examine the nominations of J. Todd 
           Inman, of Kentucky, to

           be a Member of the National Transportation Safety 
           Board, and Samuel H. Slater, of Massachusetts, to be a 
           Member of the Board of Directors of the Metropolitan 
           Washington Airports Authority.
                                                            SR-253
       Committee on Environment and Public Works
       Subcommittee on Transportation and Infrastructure
         To hold hearings to examine causes of roadway safety 
           challenges and possible interventions.
                                                            SD-406

     9 a.m.
       Committee on Appropriations
         To hold hearings to examine the Presidents supplemental 
           request for the Departments of Health and Human 
           Services and Homeland Security.
                                                            SD-106
     9:30 a.m.
       Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
         To hold hearings to examine the philosophy of AI, 
           focusing on learning from history and shaping our 
           future.
                                                            SD-562
     10 a.m.
       Committee on the Budget
         To hold hearings to examine fairness and fiscal 
           responsibility.
                                                            SD-608
       Committee on Environment and Public Works
         To hold hearings to examine accessing clean water 
           infrastructure assistance, focusing on small, rural, 
           disadvantaged and underserved communities.
                                                            SD-406
       Committee on Foreign Relations
         To hold hearings to examine U.S. national security 
           interests in Ukraine.
                                                            SD-419
     2:30 p.m.
       Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions
       Subcommittee on Primary Health and Retirement Security
         To hold hearings to examine policy considerations for 
           Artificial Intelligence in health care.
                                                            SD-430
       Committee on Indian Affairs
         To hold an oversight hearing to examine fentanyl in 
           Native communities, focusing on Native perspectives on 
           addressing the growing crisis.
                                                            SD-628
       Committee on the Judiciary
       Subcommittee on Intellectual Property
         To hold hearings to examine reforming the Patent Trial 
           and Appeal Board, focusing on the PREVAIL Act and 
           proposals to promote U.S. innovation leadership.
                                                            SD-226

     10 a.m.
       Committee on Energy and Natural Resources
         To hold hearings to examine the implementation of federal 
           coal mine land reclamation and abandoned coal mine land 
           economic revitalization programs.
                                                            SD-366

     2:30 p.m.
       Committee on Environment and Public Works
       Subcommittee on Fisheries, Water, and Wildlife
         To hold hearings to examine challenges and opportunities 
           to facilitate wildlife movement and improve migration 
           corridors.
                                                            SD-406
I am honored to commend to the House the 
memory of Mr. James C. Gorman of Mansfield, Ohio. A longtime 
philanthropist and industrialist, Mr. Gorman died on September 21 at 
age 99.
1924. A 1941 graduate of 
Mansfield Senior High School, he flew more than 70 combat missions in 
C-47s in New Guinea and the Philippines during World War II. He was a 
charter member of the Ohio National Guards 179th Airlift Wing in 1948, 
flying P-51s.
  Jim served as president of the Gorman Rupp Company, a pump 
manufacturing business founded by his father, J.C. Gorman, and business 
partner H.E. Rupp in the 1930s. His strong leadership and loyalty to 
his employees led to steady growth and international renown in the 
industry. It was just four years ago that Jim retired as a member of 
Gorman Rupps board of directors, wrapping up 73 years with the 
company.
  Jim was known throughout the region for his generosity and his 
dedication to his community. He and his family donated land to 
establish the Gorman Nature Center, the Bellville Dog Park, the Frank 
P. Lahm Aviation Museum, and an area YMCA sports complex.
  Jim volunteered his time in many ways, serving as president of both 
the Mansfield Rotary Club and the Mansfield Aviation Club. He co-
founded and led the Beechcraft Heritage Museum and was president of the 
Experimental Aircraft Association Foundation.
  Among the accolades Jim received through his career were the 
Mansfield-Richland Area Chamber of Commerce Chairmans Award, the 
Construction Industry Manufacturers Association Lifetime Achievement 
Award, the North Central State College Hall Excellence Award, the 
Beechcraft Heritage Museum Young Eagle Award, and the Experimental 
Aircraft Association Chairmans Award, as well as induction into the 
North Central State College Entrepreneurial Hall of Fame and the North 
Central Ohio Industrial Museum Hall of Fame.
  Jim was predeceased by Marjorie, his wife of 65 years who shared his 
love of aviation. He is survived by their son, Jeff; their daughter, 
Gayle; five grandchildren; and two great-grandchildren.
, we are grateful that good men like Jim Gorman dedicate 
their lives to the service of others, enriching countless lives and 
giving back so much more than they receive. On behalf of the people of 
Ohios Fourth Congressional District, I offer his family my condolences 
as they continue to reflect on this pillar of the community and his 
contributions to Mansfield and Richland County.