I rise today to celebrate and honor the Ascot 
Hills Challenge 5K Run/Walk for their 10 years of organizing a 3.1-mile 
trail course in Northeast Los Angeles.
  Founded by Troy Carbajal, Marleen Fonseca, and David Sifuentes, 
residents of El Sereno in Californias 34th Congressional District, the 
Ascot Hills Challenge 5K Run/Walk has donated event proceeds to support 
the Los Angeles Fire Department (LAFD) fire academy magnet school 
program as well as the Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD) student 
police cadet program at Woodrow Wilson High School since 2014.
  Both the LAFD fire academy magnet school program and the LAPD student 
police cadet program offer a rigorous and disciplined curriculum 
developed for young men and women expressing an interest in a public 
service career.
  Additionally, a portion of the proceeds also goes to assist with the 
efforts to protect, beautify, and maintain Ascot Hills Park for its 
continual community use.
  This annual event not only connects residents with valuable resources 
and organizations in the community, but also serves to encourage youth 
to exercise and participate in public service.
  With limited green space in Northeast Los Angeles, we are grateful to 
have leaders like Troy, Marleen, and David who ensure that Angelenos 
get to experience the green spaces in Los Angeles through events like 
the Ascot Hills Challenge 5K Run/Walk.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in celebrating this 
milestone for the Ascot Hills Challenge 5K Run/Walk, and I look forward 
to seeing all that they do in the next 10 years and beyond.
I rise today to 
congratulate Miles Krajewski on his remarkable 2024 Paralympic 
performance. Miles and his teammate, Jayci Simon, made Paralympic 
history for the United States by becoming the first Americans to medal 
in Paralympic Badminton. Miles and Jayci earned the silver medal for 
Mixed Doubles in Paris. Hailing from Yankton, South Dakota, Miles 
represented our state with dedication and skill, serving as an 
inspiration to many.
  Miles graduated from Yankton High School earlier this year and will 
attend the University of South Dakota this fall as a business student. 
As an alumnus, Im confident the University of South Dakota will be a 
great place for Miles to continue excelling as a student and athlete.
  At 19 years old, Miles has achieved significant success. Prior to 
competing at the 2024 Paralympics, he represented Team USA in Santiago 
in 2023. There, Miles won two gold medals in SH6 Badminton events where 
he secured first place in Singles by defeating the defending champion, 
and with Jayci Simon they won gold in Mixed Doubles after prevailing in 
four matches. Miles later earned bronze in Mens Doubles and Mixed 
Doubles in an impressive run at the 2024 Badminton World Federation 
Para-Badminton World Championships.
  I am proud to recognize and congratulate Miles for his hard work, 
dedication to the sport, and performance throughout his career. I wish 
him continued success in his future endeavors. I thank Miles for 
representing South Dakota well.
I rise today to 
congratulate Taryn Kloth on her remarkable 2024 Olympic performance, 
finishing ninth overall in the Womens Beach Volleyball Olympic 
competition. Taryn, a Sioux Falls native, proudly represented Team USA 
with her teammate Kristen Nuss. It was exciting to see a South Dakotan 
represent Team USA in the Paris Olympics. Our state proudly cheered on 
Taryn throughout the matches.
  Taryn attended OGorman Catholic High School in Sioux Falls, South 
Dakota where she began her impressive volleyball career. After helping 
start the first indoor volleyball team in South Dakota, Taryn earned 
the Gatorade South Dakota Player of the Year award in 2014, a national 
championship for her club team, a back-to-back state championship, and 
landed a top-20 high school ranking in the country.
  After high school, she went to Creighton University as their highest 
ranked recruit in school history. Taryn led the team to four 
consecutive Big East titles and four NCAA tournament appearances, 
including a school-best Elite 8 appearance in 2016.
  Taryn graduated early from Creighton and then attended Louisiana 
State University where she helped them to a No. 1 ranking in the 2020 
season. Taryn and Kristen completed the 2021 season going a historic 
36-0, earning multiple accolades, including the prestigious American 
Volleyball Coaches Association Pair of the Year award. The two created 
a partnership ``TKN and became the No. 1 ranked Association of 
Volleyball Professionals Beach Volleyball Team and No. 2 ranked team 
worldwide.
  I am proud to recognize and congratulate Taryn and Kristen for their 
hard work, dedication to the sport, and performance throughout their 
careers. I wish them continued success in their future endeavors. I 
thank Taryn for representing South Dakota well.
it is with great enthusiasm that 
I rise to recognize Cooper City Commissioner L. Jeffrey Green.
  Jeffrey Green began his career with the Federal Bureau of 
Investigation in January 1988 and recently celebrated his 36th year 
with the Bureau. Mr. Green currently serves as the Community Relations 
Coordinator for the Miami Division and is responsible for expanding the 
FBIs presence in local communities through civic and community 
engagement.
  In addition to his FBI career, Mr. Green is also an elected 
Commissioner for Cooper City. In this capacity, Commissioner Green is 
one of five elected officials responsible for governing local municipal 
affairs. This includes providing oversight of the Citys $60+ million-
dollar budget, its public safety operations, and all aspects of running 
a local government.
  Commissioner Green will be ending his term serving the City this 
November. As a devoted public servant for more than 14 years, 
Commissioner Green helped transform Cooper City into ``Someplace 
Special to work, live, and raise a family.
  Commissioner Green leads with his heart and has been a calming voice 
on the City Commission throughout his tenure. On behalf of the people 
of Floridas 25th District, we are grateful for his leadership and wish 
him well. We appreciate his invaluable work for the residents of Cooper 
City.
I rise today in honor of Constitution 
Week. I also rise to recognize the work and dedication that the 
Daughters of the American Revolution and the Children of the American 
Revolution pour into preserving and promoting the history of our 
Nation.
  It is a privilege to commemorate the 236th anniversary of the 
drafting and adoption of the Constitution of the United States of 
America. Constitution Week serves as a reminder of the enduring 
importance of our Constitution and the freedoms it guarantees. The 
Daughters of the American Revolution and the Children of the American 
Revolution play an invaluable role in educating future generations 
about the principles enshrined by our founding fathers.
  Through educational initiatives, historical preservation efforts, and 
community outreach, the Daughters of the American Revolution and the 
Children of the American Revolution actively engage in preserving our 
nations story. Their programs--from providing scholarships to holding 
essay contests to facilitating history projects--encourage young 
Americans to take pride in their country and serve as a reminder to 
Americans of their civic duty to protect and defend the Constitution.
  I thank the Daughters of the American Revolution Fredericksburg 
Chapter and the Surgeon Lawrence Brooks Society of the Children of the 
American Revolution for their dedication and service to our communities 
on behalf of this noble cause.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in celebrating 
Constitution Week and recognizing the Daughters of the American 
Revolution and the Children of the American Revolution for their 
remarkable achievements and their continued commitment to educating the 
American people about the United States Constitution and the history of 
our Nation.
I rise today to commemorate the life and 
accomplishments of Larry Lavelle Christian--a hero in our Tarrant 
County community and beyond.
  Larry Lavelle Christian grew up in Jones, Louisiana. As an adult, Mr. 
Christian ultimately moved to North Texas. As a professional truck 
driver, he drove through the entire county. ``Country boy, as he was 
known in his childhood, was a steadfast figure of reliability in the 
trucking community, always trying to be helpful and uplift his fellow 
truckers.
  Following the death of his wife, Mr. Christian leaned on his faith 
and felt called to retire. Upon his retirement and in one of the 
darkest moments of his life, Larry wanted to help others. Each week, 
Mr. Christians dedication to the fight against food insecurity 
illustrates his character and commitment to our community. Mr. 
Christians leadership and dedication has made a true difference in the 
state of Texas. He has been recognized by the Midwest Food Bank Texas, 
a nonprofit focused on combating hunger. In collaboration, they 
launched a major effort to obtain and distribute food to those in need. 
Their combined work led to $673,000 worth of food being provided to 
families, children, and seniors throughout Texas. I am pleased to honor
I rise today to recognize and congratulate 
Ms. Sigler has over nine years of teaching experience and has spent 
the last two years in her current role with Elizabeth Cashwell 
Elementary. She has won the admiration of both students and parents 
alike due to her focus on student-centered education.
  As the son of a retired Cabarrus County teacher, I understand the 
sacrifices our teachers and educators make every single day on behalf 
of our students, and I want to personally thank Ms. Sigler for all of 
her hard work. I feel so proud and blessed that we have such selfless 
and devoted teachers, like Ms. Sigler, in our community.
  Again, congratulations to Ms. Sigler on winning this prestigious 
award. She should feel immensely proud of all she has done to educate 
our students and instill in them a lifelong love of learning.
, please join me today in congratulating Ms. Alianna 
Sigler on being named Cumberland Countys Teacher of the Year.
I rise today to celebrate the 
accomplishments of Ms. Margie Lee Page Jones, as she has reached her 
100th birthday.
16, 1924 in 
Lee County, Texas. She soon became a big sister to her brother Alton 
Page. Their childhood was shaped by simple pleasures, including riding 
donkeys and spending time with their horse named `Oh Baby. Ms. Jones 
also developed a love for music throughout her childhood with the song 
`Rattlesnake Daddy playing on their wind-up Victrola phonograph.
  She attended the Doaks Springs School, where she was mentored by 
Principal C.L. Salsbury and teacher Ms. Corrett Moore. Soon after, she 
furthered her studies at C.J. Walker Beauty College. It was in Dallas, 
Texas that she met and married the love of her life, Mr. Joseph Jones. 
Together, they had four children--Myrtle Denise, Larry Joe, Elissa 
(Lisa) Lynn, and Michael Lee.
  Their marriage continued until Mr. Jones passed away in 2001. 
Margies family grew to include six grandchildren and nine great-
grandchildren, reflecting her role as a devoted mother and grandmother. 
Throughout her life,
a devout Christian and has played an active role in 
her church. Her involvement with the Jordan Missionary Baptist Church 
began in the late 1960s, where she has been an active member for over 
56 years. In 2015, she was honored as one of the Church Mothers, 
recognizing her longstanding commitment to her community.
  As we mark her 100th birthday, we celebrate Margies contributions to 
her family and community. Happy 100th birthday to Ms. Jones.
it is with great respect that I rise to 
celebrate National Hispanic Heritage Month and its 2024 theme, Pioneers 
of Change Shaping the Future Together. From September 15, 2024, through 
October 15, 2024, in honor of Hispanic Heritage Month, the people of 
the United States will reflect on the outstanding contributions 
Hispanic Americans have made for the future success of our great 
Nation.
  Hispanic Heritage Month begins each year on September 15 and 
recognizes the anniversaries of the independence of five Latin American 
countries: Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, and Nicaragua. 
Mexico and Chile observe their independence days on September 16 and 
September 18, respectively. This month, we take the time to commend the 
many inspiring Hispanic leaders that work to create programs and 
opportunities that are crucial for the progress of the Hispanic 
community in Northwest Indiana and beyond.
  I am proud and honored to highlight recent efforts made in the region 
to strengthen educational opportunities for the Hispanic community. In 
2020, Indiana University Northwest in Gary, Indiana, was designated as 
a Hispanic-Serving Institution by the United States Department of 
Education. Purdue University Northwest in Hammond, Indiana, received 
the same designation in 2024. The Hispanic-Serving Institution 
designation provides universities with resources for the implementation 
of programs, facilities, and services to enhance educational 
opportunities for Hispanic Americans. I believe that this remarkable 
program not only empowers the Hispanic community throughout Northwest 
Indiana but is truly vital for the prosperity of our country.
, I ask you and my other distinguished colleagues to join 
me in celebrating Hispanic Heritage Month and in honoring the leaders 
and members of the Hispanic community who have worked to improve the 
quality of life for all Americans for generations to come. Our Nations 
success is reliant upon the rich heritage and cultural diversity of its 
people.
RESEARCH AND OBSERVING ``MEDICAL RESEARCH WEEK FROM SEPTEMBER 16 
                               of indiana
I am pleased to introduce a resolution 
recognizing ``Medical Research Week from September 16 through 
September 20, 2024. This important resolution recognizes the important 
breakthroughs of medical research improving health outcomes for 
patients and communities, securing global competitiveness in science, 
boosting job creation, educating the next generation of scientists, and 
strengthening economic growth.
  Medical research through the support of the National Institutes of 
Health (NIH), continues to serve a vital role advancing health and 
medicine. This research can lead cutting edge preventative strategies 
for treatments and additional cures for longstanding medical challenges 
such as cancer, Alzheimers, heart disease, sickle cell, and obesity. I 
have met with Hoosier families that are struggling with these rare 
diseases, and I have been moved by the impact that medical research has 
on their lives. These insights have inspired me and my colleagues about 
the necessity of medical research to provide more treatment options and 
better diagnoses for all Americans.
  NIH research funding generates nearly $93 billion in economic 
activity and continues to support more than 400,000 jobs across the 
United States. Medical research is not only focused on improving the 
health of all Americans, but it is also as an economic driver for 
growth and job opportunities. NIH work ripples far beyond its 
headquarters in Bethesda, Maryland, into every state. It drives demand 
for medical supplies and research equipment, boosts local and regional 
economics to benefit manufactures and suppliers across the country, and 
into many United States territories.
  Im proud to represent Indianas 7th Congressional District which has 
become a healthcare and innovation hub in America. In my home state of 
Indiana the NIH awarded $414 million dollars in grants and contracts 
during FY23 that directly supports 5,359 jobs for Hoosiers and over 1.1 
billion dollars of economic activity. In my district alone the NIH has 
contributed $264 million dollars in grants to 9 different research 
sites in 2023; including Indiana University, Purdue University, Butler 
University, Marian University, the Regenstreif Institute, and others.
  NIH supported medical research plays a primary role in several 
sectors. The NIH supports noncommercial and clinical research with 
private sector innovation, allowing for major achievements in rare 
diseases such as ALS, substance use disorders, stroke, and Parkinsons.
  During my service in Congress, I have consistently advocated for more 
resources to expand medical research that promotes better screening 
tools for underserved and under-studied populations, and that is more 
inclusive of diverse participants in clinical trials. Congressional 
action has helped improve medical research through the NIH, CDC and 
DODs pancreatic cancer research program, supported in part by the 
bipartisan appropriations letters I lead each year to increase overall 
funding and increasing funding for the Veterans Medical and Prosthetic 
Research Program. I urge all my colleagues to join me in these 
appropriations requests and oppose the short-sighted budget cuts some 
have proposed. Imagine what we could accomplish with more robust 
investments in medical research in our nation, from making strides to 
combatting antimicrobial resistance, to harnessing the power of 
personalized medicine to treat disease, and more. These critical 
breakthroughs in medical research are our nations best hope in finding 
cures, prevention measures, and treatments for diseases affecting 
millions of Americans.
, I hope my colleagues will join me in supporting this 
resolution to recognize the importance of medical research in America I 
urge the House to support this resolution.
today, I introduce legislation that gives 
this House an opportunity to provide more funding for policing.
  My bill, the Northern Mariana Islands and American Samoa Criminal 
Justice Support Act, does this by allowing the Northern Mariana Islands 
and American Samoa to be treated as two separate entities for the 
purposes of the Edward Byrne Memorial Justice Assistance Grant program. 
Currently, the Marianas and American Samoa are considered as one entity 
for funding, unlike the other U.S. insular areas--Puerto Rico, Guam, 
and the United States Virgin Islands--which are treated as individual 
jurisdictions, as are all fifty States.
  By fixing this inequity in funding for police in the Marianas and 
American Samoa, we can ensure our local law enforcement agencies 
receive the necessary training and equipment they need to keep our 
communities safe. Making this change will also provide more funding to 
support prosecutors and the courts, as well as justice-related 
initiatives aimed at crime prevention.
  Local law enforcement is increasingly the first line of defense 
against the evolving security threats our country faces. We must do all 
we can to recognize the vital role of our police in maintaining public 
safety.
  The gentlelady from American Samoa, Ms. Radewagen, is an original 
cosponsor of the bill. I urge all my colleagues to consider this 
critical and bipartisan legislation for the good of our island 
communities.
the Constitution of the United States of 
America, the guardian of our liberties, embodies the principles of 
limited government in a republic dedicated to rule by law.
  September 17, 2024, marks the two hundred and thirty-seventh 
anniversary of the framing of the Constitution of the United States of 
America by the Constitutional Convention.
  It is fitting and proper to accord official recognition to this 
magnificent document and its memorable anniversary, and to the 
patriotic celebrations which will commemorate it.
  To honor this years Constitution Week, I ask my fellow citizens, and 
especially my fellow Members of Congress, to reaffirm the ideals the 
Framers of the Constitution had in 1787 by vigilantly protecting the 
freedoms guaranteed to us through this guardian of our liberties.

  I extend my sincerest gratitude to the members of the John Guill-
Polly Hawkins Craig Chapter of the National Society Daughters of the 
American Revolution for their steadfast commitment to honoring the 
history of our great Nation and for hosting a Constitution Week 
celebration for my constituents.
today, I rise to recognize September 2024 
as Sepsis Awareness Month. We honor individuals who have been affected 
by sepsis and pledge unwavering support and recognition of the 
diagnosis to patients and families.
  Sepsis is a life-threatening medical emergency triggered by the 
bodys extreme response to an infection. It occurs when an existing 
infection spurs a chain reaction throughout the body and rapidly leads 
to tissue damage, organ failure, and death without treatment. According 
to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, an estimated 1.7 
million American adults are diagnosed with sepsis and 350,000 adults 
die or are discharged to hospice as a result of it every year. 
Accordingly, 1 in 3 people who die in a hospital had sepsis during that 
hospitalization and for every hour treatment is delayed, the risk of 
death increases by 4 percent to 9 percent. This life-threatening 
medical emergency is the leading cause of death in U.S. hospitals.
  To raise awareness around this devastating diagnosis, we must educate 
people, share survivor stories, and support innovation and research. 
According to the Sepsis Alliance, an estimated 37 percent of U.S. 
adults have never heard of sepsis, reinforcing the need to arm 
communities with the resources to recognize and respond to it. Our 
commitment to accelerating education of the diagnosis must remain a 
priority to save lives and limbs from sepsis.
, I ask that my colleagues in the House join me in 
recognizing the month of September to advocate for patients diagnosed 
with sepsis and for the tireless work of the families, caretakers, and 
researchers supporting those who have been impacted by it.
I include in the Record 
remarks submitted at the request of a Virginia Beach constituent, Rabbi 
Dr. Israel Zoberman of Temple Lev Tikvah, and are a reflection of his 
views:

       Palestinian award-winning author and lawyer, Raja Shehadeh 
     is co-founder in 1979 of Al-Haq, the Palestinian human rights 
     organization. The Observer loaded him, ``Palestines greatest 
     prose writer and the New York Times Book Review heaps 
     praises as well, ``in his moral clarity and bearing of the 
     heart is self-questioning and assistance on focusing on the 
     experience of the individual within the storms of nationalist 
     myth and hubris, Shehadeh recalls writers such as Ghassan 
     Kanafani and Primo Levi.
       In his latest book with a challenging title, What Does 
     Israel Fear From Palestine? New York: Other Press. 2024, 
     Shehadeh, clearly a Palestinian patriot who was born in 1951 
     in the West Bank town of Ramallah, offers us a concise packed 
     yet imbalanced perspective on the long and agonizing 
     Palestinian-Israeli conflict that the October 7, 2023, 
     Hamass vile attack with terrifying Holocaust dimensions, has 
     brought into sharp view with months of fighting and much 
     suffering to both sides. The detail-oriented writer and 
     activist is anchored in the Palestinian saga of loss and 
     grievances going back to the pivotal 1948 victorious Israeli 
     War of Independence which the Palestinians painfully regard 
     as their Nakba (Catastrophe).
       Touching are the authors reminiscences of growing up in 
     Ramallah with his grandma who was a refugee from Jaffa, ever 
     missing her old home and inculcating in her young grandson an 
     attachment to the familys past. ``For a long time, I was 
     hostage to the memories, perceptions and attitudes of others 
     that I could not abandon. My sense of place was not my own. 
     However, following the 1967 War when he was able to visit 
     Jaffa, his familys roots gained a realistic sense of 
     belonging. The close physical proximity was a primary factor.
       Shehadeh blames the British for the turn of events 
     culminating in the 1948 Arab defeat and the Palestinian 
     debacle, pointing at the 1917 Balfour Declaration as the root 
     cause, stating that the 1922 to 1948 British Mandate was 
     dedicated to fulfilling the earlier declared British 
     commitment toward the Jewish people. I believe that 
     historians would beg to differ, regarding a gradual British 
     shift in the Arabs favor and manifested in severe limits on 
     Jewish refugees before and after WWII and the Holocaust. 
     Intense Jewish military pressure was created as the British 
     Empire was disintegrating. The author claims that ``what 
     happened in Palestine was the utter dissolution of a 
     nation, notwithstanding the acknowledged fact that no such 
     ``nation historically existed yet the Israeli Jewish 
     narrative supported by the Bible claims past millennial 
     Jewish life and creativity which is cavalierly dismissed by 
     the author, ``Israel treated the Bible as a historical 
     document and used it to back up the claim that the land had 
     belonged to the Jews from time immemorial, having been 
     promised to them by the Almighty.
       He bemoans the fate of the Palestinian Arabs, about 
     160,000, who remained in Israel and were ``forced to 
     celebrate Israel Independence Day. Admittedly, they were 
     caught in a bind but there is no evidence that they were 
     coerced to celebrate Israels national festivals. After all 
     they have enjoyed the benefits of becoming Israeli citizens 
     and significant progress of integration was accomplished 
     though challenges remain in a complex scenario with serious 
     security issues. There is evidence of growing Palestinization 
     of Arab Israelis while polls reflect no desire on their part 
     to trade their Israeli citizenship for an Arab one. There is 
     no mention by the author of the 750,000 Jewish refugees in 
     1948 from Arab lands who left under duress, subject to 
     pogroms and losing their belongings following centuries of 
     discrimination.
       It is hard for Shehadeh to come to grips with Israels 
     success to establish a modern Jewish national identity, 
     defined by him as ``Zionist colonization, with the 
     revitalized Hebrew language bestowing Hebrew names on the 
     rebuilt landscape that had carried Arab ones. He points at, a 
     non-starter, proposal of his late father, Aziz Shehadeh, 
     following the 1967 War, to use the 1947 Partition 
     Resolution--then denied by the Arabs--for a Palestinian 
     state. Abba Eban, Israels legendary foreign minister, 
     insightfully coined that the Palestinians ``never missed an 
     opportunity to miss an opportunity. Indeed, the 
     controversial Jewish State Law of July 19, 2018, caused 
     understandable consternation among Israeli Arabs, exacerbated 
     by the dropping of Arabic as an official language. Sadly, I 
     share with the author, only 3% of Israeli Jews are literate 
     in Arabic. That is part of an important discussion concerning 
     Israels better integration into the surrounding Arab Middle 
     East while there are those Israelis who prefer a Western 
     orientation. I suggest that both approaches ought be pursued 
     tandem.
       The books Part Two is dedicated to the Gaza War, 2023-4, 
     triggered by the October 7, 2023, Hamass massacres which the 
     author thankfully condemns though seemingly impressed with 
     the military aspects of catching Israel by surprise as Egypt 
     did in the 1973 Yom Kippur War, the breaking through the 
     failed billion plus costly barrier, along with the heavy 
     Israeli fatalities, casualties and captives. ``The brutality 
     of Hamass attack and the civilian death toll certainly cast 
     a shadow on their military success.
       Whereas an occupied population has the right under the 
     international law to resist, they have no right to commit war 
     crimes. Still, this time the Palestinians did not fit into 
     the role of victims. To the Israelis it seemed like 
     aggressors who were challenging Israels very existence.
       The astute Shehadeh is surely aware that Gaza was returned 
     to the Palestinians in 2005 by then Prime Minister Sharon, 
     followed by Hamass forceful occupation and the cruel 
     toppling of the Palestinian Authority there with no elections 
     since the 2006 Hamass ``victory. He regards the Israeli 
     response to the October 7 Nazi-like Hamass massacres 
     excessive, expecting public Israeli criticism as back in 1982 
     with the horrific Sabra and Shatila massacres in Lebanon. The 
     author though surely knows that the Christian Phalangists had 
     a decisive hand at that time. Somehow, there is no reference 
     also to Irans leading role in directing its radical proxies, 
     Hamas, Hezbollah, Houthis and others, to prevent the near 
     peace between Israel and Saudi Arabia with the successful 
     foundation of the Abraham Accords. Also, the authors 
     comparison of Israel to the once South African apartheid 
     state is misleading.
       I wholeheartedly concur with Shehadehs following 
     assessment, ``Young Israelis felt secure enough that they 
     planned a rave night on the border with Gaza. But when Hamas 
     broke through Israels vulnerability and insecurity were 
     exposed. Israelis were traumatized because they realized they 
     couldnt go on with their life in the same way, making the 
     same assumptions about the reality of the state and its 
     security. Unless, that is, they defeated the aggressor. I 
     also share the authors own response to his books title, 
     ``The very high human and material cost of the war in Gaza 
     proves that what Israel fears from Palestine is Palestines 
     very existence. Surely a Hamas controlled Palestinian state 
     is not accepted by Israel for obvious reasons.
       I do appreciate Shehadehs optimism concerning the future, 
     ``And yet, looking back at the history of the region it is 
     only after great upheavals that hopeful consequences

     follow. However, the central question and challenge remain, 
     whether two separate and contradictory narratives can be 
     reconciled for the future sake of both peoples.
       Rabbi Dr. Israel Zoberman is the founder of Temple Lev 
     Tikvah in Virginia Beach. Kazakhstans only born rabbi, he is 
     the son of Polish Holocaust Survivors and spent his early 
     childhood in transit and DP Camps in Austria and Germany. He 
     grew up Haifa, Israel.