I rise today in celebration of the 75th 
anniversary of WHIO-TV, a leader in local news in my hometown of 
Dayton, Ohio.
  WHIO was the first television station to begin broadcasting in 
Dayton, and has remained a CBS affiliate since that first broadcast. 
For nearly their entire history, WHIO has aired on Channel 7 in the 
Miami Valley and residents have routinely tuned in to the `coverage 
they can count on.
  For three quarters of a century, WHIO has provided their audience 
with vital weather updates, local and national news coverage, and in-
depth reports from their investigative unit, the I-Team. Our community 
also relies on Channel 7 for their sports coverage, faithfully airing 
both Bengals and Browns CBS games on Sundays.
  The WHIO news team plays a vital role in keeping the Miami Valley 
informed and up to date on affairs that affect our everyday life. The 
Storm Center 7 weather team prepares viewers for their day, but also 
provides lifesaving information when severe weather strikes. The news 
team holds business and government accountable to the citizens they 
serve, as well as informing viewers of local and national news stories.
  Local journalism is a critical part of our community and is 
instrumental to our democratic experiment. WHIO embraces that 
responsibility and has established itself as a trusted news source for 
the Dayton area. I join the Miami Valley in saying thank you for a 
steadfast 75 years, looking forward to tuning in for many more.
I rise to congratulate the Bulldogs 
Football Team from Artesia High School in New Mexico. In November 2023, 
the Bulldogs won their 32nd State Football Championship in Class 5A. 
That is unmatched by any other high school in the state of New Mexico. 
In fact, the Artesia Football Program has won more State Football 
Championships than any high school in the nation since 1950.
  To win a state championship takes teamwork, persistence, and 
determination. Its a reflection of the commitment of the school 
leaders, coaches, parents, and everyone in the community. Its a 
reflection of the Bulldogs players ability to succeed in their future 
endeavors.
  Let us enshrine the names of every member of the Artesia High School 
football team forever:
  Matt Saiz, Grant Johnson, Porter Hardman, Gael Ruiz, Axel Hartley, 
Juan Diego Duran, Derrick Warren, Izac Cazares, Brody McDonald, Jaden 
Waldrip, Phillip Finley-Rascon, David Hammond, Josiah Rodriguez, Jaeden 
Hutson, Jesse Leroch, Diego Lopez, Frankie Galindo, Jarren Wadkins, 
Jesse Armendariz, Cael Houghtaling, Angelo Silvas, Andrew Rodriguez, 
Jaykob Ortega, Edel Villa, Jett Whitmire, Haden Harcrow, Joseph 
Martinez, Jeremiah Chavez, Miguel Soto, Nye Estrada, Kaden Zuniga, 
David Ybarra, Cody Johnson, Gabino Barrera, Jake Vandevender, Zach 
Wells, Hagan Crockett, Tootie McNeil, Xavyer Jagger, Ayden Huffman, 
Jesus Estrada, Omar Salais, Rafael Orozco, Steven Williams, Diego 
Wesson, Dylan Fisher, Ricardo Huerta, Saul Peralta, Francisco Caleyo, 
Kaden Grantham, Myka Aguirre, Juan Leon, Ivan Chacon, Adrian Ramirez, 
Edgar Canillo, Kellen Worley, Enrique Armendariz, Garret Fisher, 
Stephen Butts, Daeven Hutson, Manuel Calderon, Jackson Parker, Devyn 
Velasquez, Troy Tomsic, Carson Troost, Caleb Martin, Marco Soto, Daniel 
Aguilar, Joel Crosby, Caleb Murray, Crecencio Cuellar, Jonathan 
Gonzalez, Fernando Lira, Kaden Beauregard, Ethan Conn, Bryce Parra, 
Jacob Parrish, Jack Byars, Gavin Brown, Ulrich Medez, Santiago 
Esquibel, Jacob Calderon, Xavier Ramirez, Braylon Kinnibrugh, Kaiden 
Fredrickson, Andres Estrada, Yeudiel Salamanca, and Ricky Maesta.
  Let us also remember the incredible work of the managers Max 
Klingshirn, Ryan Hickey, Jesus Ruiz, Matt Gage, and Kaiden Fredrickson 
as well as the coaches Jeremy Maupin, Jourdan Rodriguez, Jackson 
Bickel, Tony Jaramillo, Max Rodriguez, Derek Montoya, Andy Lopez, and 
Cory Saxon. Youre all great examples of the persevering spirit of New 
Mexico.
  Go Bulldogs.
today I would like to include in the 
Record an important article from consumer advocate, lawyer, and author 
Ralph Nader that celebrate the determination and courage of citizen 
activists like Nadia Milleron. Nadias daughter, Samya Rose Stumo, 
tragically died in a plane crash when the defective Boeing 737 Max she 
was in, crashed in Ethiopia on March 10, 2019, killing all 156 people 
on board. Nadia was determined to fight for justice, and successfully 
pushed for action to ensure that the families of victims of such 
tragedies could collect punitive damages. Her story is an inspiration 
that should be read by all as a reminder that in our democracy, one 
person truly can make a difference.

       The mass media is reluctant to recognize civic heroes 
     unless they display physical bravely such as rushing into a 
     burning building to save a child. The media also lavishes 
     vast coverage on sports heroes and entertainers.

       Unnoticed by the mass media was how it came about that the 
     Illinois legislature, overcome by corporate lobbyists, passed 
     legislation allowing punitive damages for wrongful death 
     disasters, and sent the bill to Illinois Governor J.B. 
     Pritzker who signed it last Friday.
       In the words of one state lawmaker, this effort started 
     with ``that lady from New England who drove down here (to 
     Springfield, Illinois) and shamed us all. That lady was my 
     niece Nadia Milleron, who lost her daughter Samya Rose 
     Stumo--an emerging leader in global health--to the defective 
     Boeing 737 Max that crashed in Ethiopia on March 10, 2019, 
     killing all 156 people on board. (Earlier on October 29, 
     2018, a similar also new Boeing 737 Max crashed off 
     Indonesias coast, killing all 189 passengers and crew.)
       Nadia was determined that families in the future who lost 
     their loved ones to reckless corporate actions and crimes 
     would not be told by Illinois courts that, were people 
     rendered disabled, they could collect punitive damages--but 
     not if their lives were taken. The cruel absurdity of this 
     perverse rule that lets companies escape punitive damages 
     under the law of torts (wrongful injuries) if their 
     recklessness or greed kills their victims, but not if they 
     injure them, was too much for Nadia to tolerate.
       Driven by her love of Samya and her determination to end 
     this gross injustice, she spent months away from her 
     Massachusetts home in 2022 getting appointments with every 
     Illinois Assembly person--177 of them--to plead her case in 
     person. None of the naysayers she encountered in the lobbying 
     circles around the legislature deterred her, not even some 
     plaintiff trial lawyers.
       By the sheer force of her legal and factual arguments, her 
     moral authority and a few senior political advisors in 
     Chicago, she laid the groundwork for action earlier last 
     year. The Illinois Wrongful Death Act was championed by a 
     young African-American state lawmaker, Rep. La Shawn K. Ford. 
     Once it started moving through the Assembly (with little 
     media attention) it gained momentum among the new Assembly 
     leadership that carried through to the new leadership of the 
     State Senate. Both legislative Houses are controlled by 
     Democrats.
       Nadia came to this challenge in Illinois, where the Stumo 
     family civil tort litigation against Boeing is pending, with 
     experience in battling the giant Boeing corporations power 
     to get its way in Washington, DC. For months after Boeings 
     homicides in Ethiopia (See, September 16, 2020, News Release 
     from the House Committee on Transportation), Nadia and her 
     husband Mike (both non-practicing lawyers), with the help of 
     their two articulate sons, and other relentless, bereaved 
     families, worked the corridors and offices of Congress, 
     pressing for public hearings and legislation. Their efforts, 
     punctuated by public demonstrations, culminated in the 
     passage of federal legislation to start the process of 
     strengthening air safety regulations.
       The Stumos and their family network also focused on the 
     derelict FAA which, over the years, had transformed itself 
     from a supposed aviation safety regulator to a weak, 
     consultants role. The agency literally delegated regulatory 
     decisions and inspections to deputized Boeing employees on 
     the factory floor and in the design offices. Boeing and other 
     aircraft manufacturers made sure that Congress did not object 
     and indeed had Congress facilitate this delegation, including 
     by keeping the FAAs regulatory budget and skilled staff too 
     small to regulate directly and forcefully.
       Nonetheless, with astute and newsworthy press conferences 
     and accurate responsiveness to media inquiries, the families 
     pushed the FAA to be a little more hands-on and probing than 
     it was up to 2019.
       When the punitive damage bill passed the Illinois 
     legislature, Governor Pritzker had 60 days to either sign it 
     or let it become law. He chose to sign it on August 12th 
     without any ceremony, without having Nadia, the young 
     Assemblyman Ford and other senior state lawmakers by his 
     side. Had he made it an event, he would have memorably 
     conveyed the key motivating belief in a democracy--that one 
     person can make a difference!
       Citizen Nadia blazed the way, shaming the foot-dragging 
     Illinois Trial Lawyers Association (ITLA) into jumping on the 
     bandwagon in Springfield once the bills momentum grew.
       On February 27, 2023, I wrote a letter to the President of 
     the Illinois Trial Lawyers Association, Patrick A. Salvi II, 
     wondering why the ITLA hadnt pushed this initiative over 
     many past years and urged them to ``make the maximum effort 
     to secure passage. Trial Lawyer Associations do not usually 
     answer letters, but this one got through, with copies to 
     other interested parties. (See the letter here).
       Our country, over time, has been helped immeasurably by 
     outraged mothers (and fathers) turning their unabating 
     mourning over the loss of their children into laser beam 
     intensity behind health and safety laws to save other parents 
     and children from similar tragedies. (Note e.g., Mothers 
     Against Drunk Driving).
       These civic heroes defy all odds to challenge and prevail. 
     The odds dont faze them; they have a higher calling to 
     achieve.
       Unfortunately, neither Governor Pritzker nor the mass media 
     seized this dramatic moment for exemplary recognition. The 
     law, however, now is on the books to further more humane and 
     deterrent purposes, thanks ``to that Lady from New England 
     who shamed us all.
I rise today to pay tribute to 
my good friend, Mr. Don Bloomer, who is retiring after nearly 50 years 
of service at Citizens National Bank in Somerset, Kentucky. Over the 
last five decades, Don has been a trusted leader in the Lake Cumberland 
area, dedicating countless hours of volunteer service to other 
community entities, and helping local families and businesses reach or 
exceed their financial goals.
  Raised on a small farm in Pulaski County, Don knew the value of hard 
work and loyalty from an early age. His lifes dream was to be a 
successful citizen in his hometown community and a strong family man, 
both of which he has accomplished through diligent work and compassion.
  Don first arrived at Citizens National Bank as a Management Trainee 
in 1976, under the guidance of former bank president Clay Davis. From 
there he climbed the banking ladder as auditor, comptroller, and 
cashier, until he was promoted to President and CEO in 2007, where he 
has guided the bank and the local community through unexpected changes 
in technology and financial shifts ever since. Clay encouraged Don to 
learn every aspect of the industry through advanced educational 
opportunities, strengthening the future of the institution he serves 
and the local community.
  May his lifes story be an inspiration to our aspiring youth who hope 
to one day follow in Dons footsteps, working hard from the family farm 
to become the local bank president in their hometown. We can all make a 
difference in our communities, like Don Bloomer, with a tireless work 
ethic and sheer resolve to make this region a better place to live.
  My wife Cynthia and I deeply appreciate the loyal friendship of Don 
and Rhonda Bloomer, and we wish them the most joyful years of 
retirement in the years ahead.
I, along with the people of St. Louis, rise to 
honor and celebrate the life and legacy of Erna JeNeen French. Erna 
was a giant in the gospel community, a mother, grandmother, and sister 
who dedicated her life to spreading the joy and love of God through her 
powerful voice.
  Erna professed her devotion to Jesus Christ at the early age of five, 
and she knew she would one day be a famous gospel singer. Inspired by 
her mother Lavera, gospel music was always central to Ernas life. Erna 
was a scholar of spiritual hymns, and she understood the weight those 
verses carried. Before the age of 12, Erna recorded three national 
gospel records with the Thomas A. Dorsey National Convention of Gospel 
Choirs and Choruses under the St. Louis Gospel Choral Union, the ONeal 
Twins, and the Stan Lee Gospel Music Workshop. Later in her life, Erna 
recorded with numerous artists and ministries nationally and 
internationally and was a member of the Gospel Music Workshop of 
America, the Sanctified POSSE, GEMCA, Dello Thedford and the Gospel 
Symphonic Choir, Rusty Watson, One Voice, the Psalms of David, and 
countless other ministries. In 2018, Erna accomplished a lifelong dream 
releasing her project ``Always with the help of Levi Too King.
  A student of the University City School District, she was a proud 
member of the graduating class of 1985. In 1986, Erna began a career as 
a professional driver. She drove school buses until 1998 when she 
joined the Bistate Development Agency/Metro St. Louis Transit Agency, 
from which she retired in 2021.
  Most importantly, Erna loved spending time with her family. Her 
daughter Alysha DeNise French and grandson CJ were the lights of her 
life. Erna shared her deep passion for gospel music with her older 
sister, Monica. I offer my deepest condolences on behalf of Missouris 
First District to Ernas entire family and all those who loved her.
I rise to honor the life and legacy of my 
friend, Bill Brand, Mayor of Redondo Beach. Mayor Brand passed away on 
Friday, February 9th at home alongside friends and family. He valiantly 
fought stage-four lung cancer over the past four and a half years, 
while remaining in office. He survived his specific cancer longer than 
any other diagnosed in the United States.
  Bill Brand was born in Dallas, Texas, and moved to the South Bay 
region of Los Angeles County in 1966. He vividly remembered his first 
sight of the Seaside Lagoon and called it ``finding heaven. Bill 
dedicated his life to serving people. He saw the need to champion 
access to open space for South Bay residents and created a non-profit 
organization in 2004, the South Bay Parkland Conservancy, which is 
dedicated to the restoration, preservation, and public use of coastal 
land resources in the South Bay. This organization continues to grow 
and serve our coastal communities as a steward of our environment, 
carrying on Bills legacy.
  Bill Brand expanded on his work in public service, first as a Member 
of the Redondo Beach City Council, and finally as Mayor, a position he 
served until his last day. He was a fierce advocate for many 
environmental and coastal priorities, and it was a great honor to work 
with him to champion these issues.
  Bill is survived by his loving wife, Deirdre. He served his community 
fervidly despite the difficulty of his condition. His tremendous will 
was a demonstration of his love and dedication for his community. He 
was a remarkable public servant, and it was a privilege to know him and 
call him a friend. May his memory live on in his many contributions to 
the community.
I rise today to honor the life and legacy 
of one of Connecticuts great leaders in our states legal profession 
and government who sadly passed

recently, Mr. Martin ``Bo Byran Burke. A true gentleman, Bo 
represented thousands of clients, guiding them expertly through legal 
difficulty and, at times, crisis. The positive impact he made on 
countless individuals, families, and small businesses is incalculable. 
He also enthusiastically participated in politics and government out of 
both a sense of civic duty and his abiding devotion to our democracy 
and constitution.
  Born in 1940 to Edmond and Francis Burke, Bo was a true son of New 
England. His passion for his community and region defined his lifes 
choices. After graduating from Colgate University with a Bachelors in 
English, Bo continued his studies as he pursued a Juris Doctor from 
Albany School of Law. Although Bos first foray into law was in New 
York State, he soon returned to his home state, passing the Connecticut 
Bar Exam in 1968.
  Bos career as a lawyer was long, eventful, and widely respected. His 
work ethic was unparalleled, and he was modest about his 
accomplishments. His small-town practice in Vernon, Connecticut was 
always centered on representing people, not large institutional 
clients. Today that model might be viewed by some as out of date, but 
Bo knew that such representation is at the heart of the oath he took 
when he was admitted to the bar. Bo was also committed to improving the 
profession. Bo served on the Connecticut Judicial Review Council, the 
Connecticut Law Revision Commission, and the Committee on Government 
Administration and Policy and the Governors Commission on Judicial 
Reform. He additionally wrote for numerous law journals, such as the 
Connecticut Law Journal and the Connecticut Bar Journal. Bo opened his 
own practice in Vernon where he had immeasurable success. He focused on 
law, Title XIX, special needs, trusts, veterans benefits, probate, and 
real estate. He took upon immense responsibilities as he briefed and 
argued over 12 reported appellate cases. Bo was understood by those 
around him to be a wise and trustworthy lawyer due to his extensive 
experience and mastery of the law.
  Bo applied his vast knowledge of law and government to an amazingly 
accomplished one term in the Connecticut General Assembly. In 1974 he 
ran and won the 56th Assembly seat, representing Vernon. In his single 
term, he took on the incredibly important and difficult task of writing 
our states freedom of information act. Opening state and local 
government to the press and public was extremely challenging. Yet, 
because of his diligent, talented ability to shape the bill and win 
consensus, the measure passed and was signed into law by Governor Ella 
Grasso. That law has withstood the test of time and still provides 
sunlight on the processes of government which is essential to a healthy 
democracy. After his two years of representation for the constituents 
of district 56, he decided to redirect his focus from elective office 
back to his law practice and town government. He transitioned to 
positions within the towns of Vernon and Rockville. For many years, he 
served both as Town Attorney and Assistant Town Attorney of Vernon. Bo 
endlessly served his town and state and was a champion of protecting 
democracy.
  As someone who understood the opportunities created from receiving 
advanced education, Bo took it upon himself to improve and advocate for 
education with his town. Of course, a big reason for his interest was 
his long and beautiful marriage to his talented wife Ellen, who taught 
hundreds and hundreds of children in the Vernon Public Schools. He 
served as counsel on the Vernon Education Foundation to being a member 
and Chairman on the Board of Trustees at the Rockville Public Library. 
Between Bo and Ellen, Vernons education standards remained high, which 
is part of the reason two schools received blue ribbon awards from the 
U.S. Department of Education, something which is a great source of 
pride in Vernon.
  Bos career was one element of his multifaceted and exciting life. 
Since the mid-60s, he had been a continuous vacationer in Maine. For 
much of this time, he owned a camp on Flying Pond in Vienna, Maine. The 
days spent in Maine were calm and relaxing and gave Bo breaks from his 
demanding career as a lawyer.
  It has been a great honor to personally know Bo. I met him when I was 
a young lawyer in Vernon many years ago and had the benefit of 
practicing law in the same community for many years. His example of 
strong advocacy and common-sense willingness to find common ground to 
settle disputes still resonates with me to this day. In 1986, I ran for 
the same seat he held in the general assembly and with his help, I was 
fortunate enough to prevail. He was always willing to provide counsel 
and advice which I deeply appreciated. Twenty years later he supported 
my election to the U.S. Congress, which was so special and meaningful 
to me.
, I am proud to immortalize him today. He has been a great 
inspiration not just for me, but for his family, community, and beyond. 
His loss is deeply felt by his family members, including his wife, 
Ellen Schopfer Burke; his sons, Matthew, Jonathan, Andrew, and Sullivan 
Burke, and their wives; his sister, Susan Evans Burke, and his cousin 
Mary Jane Dempsey. He will also be missed by the community at large, 
which has seen many improvements directly due to Bos efforts and deep 
commitment to others. His deep and nuanced understanding of the law 
assisted many constituents in defending their rights as American 
citizens. I am grateful to know that Bos legacy will carry on within 
and beyond my district, as others follow in his footsteps.
I am pleased to honor the life, legacy, and 
faith of Keith King, who died of pancreatic cancer on February 3, 2024, 
at the age of 75. Keith was a champion for the Pikes Peak region as a 
successful and generous business entrepreneur, elected official, and 
advocate for school choice and charter schools. Keith had a tremendous 
impact on those around him, but it was only possible because he was 
driven and directed by his love for Jesus Christ and his family. Keith 
King was truly a giant in advancing policies that helped families, 
children, schools, and the state of Colorado. In addition to being a 
personal colleague in the Colorado legislature for seven years and a 
brother in Christ, Keith was my friend.
  Born in Tekoa, Washington, Keith moved to Colorado and completed his 
bachelors degree at Colorado State University, Pueblo in industrial 
education in 1970. He continued his education at Oregon State 
University in 1976 with a masters degree in vocational education. It 
was through his studies that his already budding desire to see children 
succeed in school and have as many education choices as possible 
available to them bloomed. Keith served on the Cheyenne Mountain School 
board from 1991 to 1995; and was president of Cheyenne Mountain Charter 
Academy, which he co-founded, from 1995 to 1998. Keith also started 
Colorado Springs Early Colleges and Colorado Early Colleges which 
provided high schoolers the opportunity to take college classes and 
receive job training. Education choice and specifically the emergence 
and growth of charter schools in Colorado became one of Keiths main 
passions in his legislative career.
  First elected to the Colorado House of Representatives in 1999, 
Keiths first year in the legislature showed immediate results. During 
his first session in office, Keith was the lead sponsor of two bills 
that improved charter school structures and operations that were signed 
into law. This impressive success record was only the beginning of 
Keiths impact on Colorado. Keith sponsored the annual school finance 
act three times and sponsored the landmark College Opportunity Fund 
which created substantial change to the funding system for public 
colleges and universities.
  Keith and his wife Sandi of more than fifty years enjoyed the 
blessings of their sons Jeremy and Brandon, their families, and their 
five grandchildren. A devoted husband and Christian, Keith embodied 1 
Corinthians 16:13-14 in every way that he lived his life, especially in 
the public square as a legislator: ``Be on your guard; stand firm in 
the faith, be courageous; be strong. Do everything in love.
  Education remains one of the most important pillars of our society 
today. Keith recognized that high-quality and well-funded education 
gave each child the best chance at an impactful life. Keiths faith and 
his family provided Keith with his ``North Star as he used his gifts 
and abilities to make life better for all of those around him. Even 
into his later years, Keith was on campus at local high schools 
teaching and coaching basketball. Mr. Speaker, I ask that my colleagues 
in Congress join me in remembering and honoring the life of a faithful 
man in Keith King whose impact in the Pikes Peak region will be felt 
for the rest of time.
INTRODUCTION OF THE McINTIRE-STENNIS ACT DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA EQUALITY 
                                  ACT
today, I introduce the McIntire-Stennis Act 
District of Columbia Equality Act, which would correct an apparent 
oversight in the exclusion of the District of Columbia from eligibility 
for funding under the McIntire-Stennis Act.
  The Act provides the states and certain territories with formula 
funding to support state designated institutions cooperative forestry 
research programs. The funding available under this Act assists the 
states and territories in carrying out forestry research programs at 
state forestry schools and colleges and developing a trained pool of 
forest scientists capable of conducting needed forestry research.
  District of Columbia residents pay full federal taxes and therefore 
District of Columbia is treated as a state under federal programs, with 
limited exceptions. The Act defines ``State to include Puerto Rico, 
the Virgin Islands and Guam, whose residents do not pay full federal 
taxes. D.C.s exclusion from the Act makes it ineligible for federal 
funding that would support research at D.C.s public university, the 
University of the District of Columbia (UDC). The College of 
Agriculture, Urban Sustainability and Environmental Sciences at UDC, 
the nations only urban land-grant university, offers programs that 
complement D.C.s ongoing forestry efforts and serve individuals in 
D.C. and beyond. Rectifying D.C.s exclusion from the Act would ensure 
equal treatment for D.C. and provide UDC a fair share of resources.
  I urge my colleagues to support this bill.
I rise today to recognize the more than 
160,000 Black-owned employer businesses in the U.S. during National 
Entrepreneurship Week.
  Black businessowners experience pervasive barriers to accessing 
capital--more than any other demographic.
  According to the Alliance for Entrepreneurial Equity, two-thirds of 
Black employers seek financing to expand business operations, yet half 
of them are denied loans and lines of credit.
  Micael Habte is the owner of Upper Cup Coffee, an Eritrean-based 
coffee shop and wholesale coffee supplier located in the Old Towne East 
neighborhood of Columbus. Despite capital challenges due to COVID-19, 
today Micael is running two cafes, and a coffee kiosk, and has even 
expanded his roasting facility.
  Im proud of the fortitude businessowners like Micael have displayed, 
and I urge my colleagues to closely consider the challenges faced by 
Black entrepreneurs.
  We must work together to build a stronger, more equitable economy for 
all.
I rise today to recognize the 
appointment of a dedicated servant leader and a true visionary for the 
Macedonia Missionary Baptist Church of Macon, Georgia, Minister Belvin 
D. Ware. Minister Ware was elected by the church to serve as Head 
Pastor in December of 2023, and he was officially installed at the 
church on February 18, 2024, at 3:00 p.m.
  A native of Macon, Georgia, Belvin D. Ware was born to the union of 
Denise T. Jones and Lawrence F. Ware, Jr. both of Macon, Georgia. 
Minister Ware completed his childhood education in Macon and is a 
graduate of Central High Schools Class of 1996. He is currently in the 
process of completing a Bachelor of Science degree in Biblical Studies. 
Minister Ware is also a United States Marine, joining in 1998 and 
reaching the rank of Staff Sergeant (E6) where he served for over 
sixteen years before receiving an Honorable Discharge.
  Minister Ware first accepted Christ at the young age of seven years 
old at Macedonia Missionary Baptist Church, and he accepted the call to 
ministry in December of 2012. He gave his initial sermon on September 
29, 2013, at New Life Family Worship in Jacksonville, North Carolina 
where he also received his License of Ministry. In July of 2018, 
Minister Ware accepted a full-time position at Macedonia Missionary 
Baptist Church as the Servant Leader of Children, Youth, and Young 
Adults. After one year of successfully mentoring the churchs youth and 
bringing them closer to the Lord, Lead Pastor Eddie Smith ordained Mr. 
Ware as a Minister of Gospel in October 2019 and named him Assistant to 
the Pastor.
  During his tenure as Servant Leader of Children, Youth, and Young 
Adults, Minister Ware was responsible for evaluating, planning, and 
implementing a thorough course of action for the youth to grow in their 
faith. He facilitated Bible Study and Youth Church, oversaw the 
baptisms of eight young people and grew youth membership at Macedonia 
through outreach at local colleges and universities. Furthermore, 
Minister Ware has been instrumental in local community outreach--most 
notably his ministry at Bruce Elementary School where he visited at 
least twice a month to mentor at risk youths and facilitate two coat 
drives in which Macedonia Missionary Baptist Church donated over 250 
winter coats to underprivileged youth. Following his efforts at the 
school, the Bibb County Board of Education selected Minister Ware to be 
a sitting member on the board to hire Bruce Elementarys next 
principal. Additionally, as Assistant to the Pastor, Minister Ware 
began the process and coordinated training with Middle Georgia Food 
Bank to establish Macedonia as a local agency to establish a food bank 
on church grounds.
  Minister Ware has been recognized numerous times for his professional 
achievements. He is a recipient of the Navy and Marine Corps 
Achievement Medal, Certificate of Commendation, and Letter of 
Appreciation. He was recognized by the Middle-Georgia Black Pages as a 
Young Entrepreneur and Professional in 2019 and was also nominated for 
Leadership Macon in 2022, a year-long program that introduces a class 
of rising community leaders to the successes and challenges in Macon-
Bibb Countys public, private, and nonprofit sectors.
  Former Congresswoman Shirley Chisholm once said that ``Service is the 
rent that we pay for the space that we occupy here on this earth. 
Belvin Ware has paid his rent many times over and still continues to 
give a prodigious amount of love and service back to his community. He 
is currently the Executive Director for Heal the Hood Empowering 
Movement, a community initiative to cure violence and to bring economic 
power back to the Macon community through mentoring, job placement, and 
prison reform. He is also a Co-founder of the Concord Project which is 
a partnership between the local clergy and the Bibb County Sheriffs 
Office.

  Minister Ware has accomplished many things in his life, but none of 
it would have been possible without the enduring love and support of 
his loving wife of over fifteen years, Aisha N. Ware, as well as his 
sons, Kingston Josiah and Kingsley Uriah.
, today I ask my colleagues to join my wife, Vivian, and 
me, along with more than 765,000 people of Georgias Second 
Congressional District, in recognizing and commending Minister Belvin 
D. Ware, on his continued service as the newly appointed Pastor of 
Macon, Georgias Macedonia Missionary Baptist Church.
I rise today to honor and recognize the 
late John Graham, Jr. as the committed family man he was and will 
continue to be in memory.
  While at Poquoson High School, he won notable achievements such as: 
becoming Virginias Boys State Representative, being elected President 
of his Senior class, and was a brilliant athlete. John was such a 
brilliant athlete he not only received the role of Captain his junior 
and senior years of high school, he also was recognized as ``Little All 
American during his football career in college. His drive to play and 
contribute to his teams got him inducted into the RMC Hall of Fame in 
2015.
  While working for NASA he was a fundamental contributor to 
groundbreaking missions. John was critical in developing and building 
the budding space program, even working alongside the original 
astronauts. He also held crucial roles in the development of the 
Mercury, Gemini, and Apollo space programs.
  Unfortunately, right before John was eligible to retire from NASA, he 
was confronted with a decision that would change his life forever. His 
father was fighting through a tough battle with pancreatic cancer and 
asked John to take over the family business in his stead.
  Showing true sacrifice and dedication to his family, John decided to 
leave his career at NASA in order to preserve his familys seafood 
business: Graham &amp; Rollins. Keeping the spirit of a true family 
business, John brought his children and wife Sandra Graham to work 
alongside him, further cementing how his family was always a top 
priority. As President of Graham &amp; Rollins, John expanded the company 
threefold, leaving a family legacy to his children and grandchildren.
  During his successful career within the family business, John also 
took the time to mentor his sons and grandsons in wrestling. Due to his 
mentorship, his sons were able to blossom in the sport and each hold 
notable records. With a renewed sense of love for the sport, John had a 
vision to expand the fan base of wrestling. Thats why he helped create 
the Peninsula Wrestling Association as well as founding the Virginia 
Duals. He even went on to serve as the team leader for the Olympic 
wrestling team in 1988 and 1996. Due to his contributions to the sport, 
John was awarded the Order of Merit for the National Wrestling Hall of 
Fame and was inducted into both the Virginia Wrestling and Lower 
Peninsula Halls of Fame.
  John will always be known for his devotion to his family, his love 
for sports, and his unwavering commitment to give back to his 
community.
, I ask you to join me in recognizing John Graham, Jr. and 
to thank his wonderful family for giving me the pleasure of 
acknowledging him and recognizing the kindness he shared with the world 
around him.
I rise today to recognize Keller City 
Manager, Mark Hafner, who is retiring after more than four decades of 
public service. At just 18 years old, Mr. Hafner started his career as 
a police officer. In 2001, he moved his family to Texas to lead the 
Keller Police Department as the Chief of Police. Under his watch, 
Kellers first Crime Control and Prevention District sales tax was 
passed, allocating a portion of the tax dollars toward ensuring public 
safety. Keller Police Department also earned its state and national 
accreditations and forged cutting-edge partnerships in 911 dispatch, 
animal services, detention, municipal court services, and policing with 
the cities of Colleyville, Roanoke, Southlake, and Westlake. He also 
oversaw two major police station expansions and renovation projects.

  After 14 years as the Chief of Police, including three as Kellers 
Director of Public Safety, Mr. Hafner was promoted to the 
organizations top spot in June 2015 as the City Manager. In this 
position, hes overseen historic investments in public infrastructure, 
parks, and recreation amenities, helped attract vibrant commercial 
development, and worked to ensure Kellers long-term financial 
security. The new Keller Senior Activities Center and renovations to 
Fire Stations 2 and 3 were also completed under his tenure.
  I Thank Mr. Hafner for all he has done to protect and serve the 
people of North Texas. His career has been marked by a commitment to 
excellence, service and innovation. I congratulate him on his well-
deserved retirement, he will be missed.
I rise to remember Geremiah 
Lofton--an intelligent, hardworking, and charismatic former member of 
my staff--who passed away on January 22, 2024.
  A proud native of Port Arthur, Texas, Geremiah was the son of Gina 
and Kenneth Lofton, Sr. He graduated from Memorial High School and went 
on to earn a bachelors degree in business administration from Huston-
Tillotson University in Austin, Texas, a Historically Black College.
  Dedicated to public service, Geremiah served as an intern at the 
Department of State during college and moved to Washington, D.C., after 
graduation. He joined the staff of the Committee on Homeland Security 
in 2019, first as an intern and later as a staff assistant and a 
committee clerk, while pursuing his masters in public administration 
at The George Washington University.
  After earning his masters degree, Geremiah continued his 
congressional service by assisting the Select Committee on the January 
6th Attack on the United States Capitol.
  Geremiah was an exemplary and engaging member of my staff. His work 
was excellent and his warm, kind personality won him many friends on 
the Committee and across Capitol Hill.
   In 2022, Geremiah became special assistant and briefing book 
coordinator for the Secretary of Homeland Security, where he served for 
nearly 2 years as a valued member of the Department of Homeland 
Security team.
  Geremiah was also active in the community, as a member of Alpha Phi 
Alpha Fraternity, Incorporated, and Eastern Star Baptist Church in Port 
Arthur.
  Geremiah left us too soon, and he will be greatly missed not only by 
his loved ones in Port Arthur but also his Capitol Hill family and 
friends. We are better for having known Geremiah and are grateful for 
his many contributions to the Committee, the community, and our 
country. My heartfelt sympathies and sincere condolences are with the 
Lofton family at this most difficult time.