I rise to celebrate the centennial 
anniversary of the Selbyville Volunteer Fire Company. Just over 100 
years ago, a group of young men saw a need in their community, decided 
to act, and established this company. Now, a century later, it has 
grown into what it is today--a critical part of the Selbyville 
community with a legacy of exceptional service.
  In addition to this occasion being a chance for fellowship and 
comradery between those in uniform, it is also an opportunity for the 
rest of us, whom the members of the Company serve, to pause and express 
our gratitude for their selfless and dangerous work.
  To these firefighters: we in Delaware know the risk each of them 
takes when they put on their uniforms and go to work each day. And to 
take on these risks is as remarkable as it is inspiring. Our state 
would not enjoy the same peace of mind without people like them 
answering the call and volunteering their time to protect our 
communities.
  In Delaware, we are incredibly proud to have so many wonderful 
volunteer firefighters

up and down our state. I am proud to be their Congresswoman, and 
especially as a member of the Congressional Fire Services Caucus, I am 
proud to be their champion in the House of Representatives.
  Again, Mr. Speaker, I would like to extend my congratulations to 
everyone at the Selbyville Volunteer Fire Company for this historic 
accomplishment and thank them for their selfless service. Heres to the 
next hundred years.
I want to celebrate the outstanding 
achievements of the Detroit City Chess Club and congratulate its 
members as they celebrate 20 years.
  Under the incredible leadership and vision of Mr. Kevin Fite, Detroit 
City Chess Clubs founder, students from across Detroit Public Schools 
have been recognized regionally and nationally for their skills. 
Inspired by the popularity and success of the teams he coached at 
Detroits Duffield Elementary and Middle Schools; Coach Fite founded 
the Detroit City Chess Club in 2003. He leveraged a partnership with 
the Detroit Institute of Arts to provide a permanent home for students 
to play outside of regular school hours.
  Since then, Detroit City Chess Club has strived to engage young 
people in the game of chess. The club has grown from only a handful of 
members at its inception to reaching thousands of students and adults 
alike. The Detroit City Chess Club has played all over the world, 
winning 15 National titles, 16 regional championships, 28 state 
championships, and hosting 4 individual No. 1 players in the U.S.
  The 12th Congressional District is proud to recognize the Detroit 
City Chess Club, its members, and volunteers for their outstanding 
contributions to our community as we wish them well on 20 years of 
gamesmanship, education, and camaraderie.
it is my honor to recognize and congratulate 
Winamac Coil Spring, Inc. on 75 years of doing business in Indianas 
Second Congressional District.
  For more than 7 decades, Winamac Coil Spring has been a leading 
manufacturer of compression, extension single and double torsion 
springs, and wireforms.
  I am proud to represent the ``RV Capital of the World in Congress. 
The work Winamac Coil Spring has done for 3-quarters of a century has 
played a meaningful role in allowing our District to have and maintain 
that distinction.
  The professional, quality work Winamac Coil Spring does is not 
limited to the recreational vehicle industry, however. From agriculture 
to appliances, construction to industrial, Winamac Coil Spring serves a 
wide variety of industries and markets, with an ironclad commitment to 
customer satisfaction always at the forefront.
  Additionally, Winamac Coil Springs example as a successful family-
owned business is an inspiration to those looking to start their own 
companies, as well as a source of pride for many Hoosiers.
  Congratulations again on reaching this impressive milestone. I thank 
them for their many contributions to Pulaski County and communities 
through the Second District. I wish them continued success and many 
more years in business and anniversaries to celebrate going forward.
I rise today to recognize the 70th 
anniversary of the end of hostilities in the Korean War. From the 
freezing temperatures of the Chosin Reservoir to the race to the Yalu 
River, over 1.8 million men and women from our Armed Forces fought with 
distinction and bravery.
  Unfortunately, the Korean War still lingers today as the armistice 
was never intended to be a permanent peace treaty. The armistice 
established the Demilitarized Zone on the 38th parallel and currently 
divides the free Nation of South Korea and the communist regime in 
North Korea.
  Since the end of hostilities, South Korea has forged a historic and 
beautiful relationship with the United States and is 1 of our closest 
allies in Asia. Today, South Korea remains prosperous, democratic, and 
unwavering in the face of communist aggression. Each year, we are 
reminded that the costs of freedom come with a heavy price, and we are 
grateful for all service members who demonstrated integrity and courage 
in the struggle for self-determination.
  I have requested the United States flag to be flown over our Nations 
Capital to recognize our Nations veterans in their valiant efforts to 
defeat the threat of communism. We must continue to stay vigilant and 
strive to maintain order and stability in the region. I will continue 
to advocate for efforts that will unify the Korean people once again. 
Our Veterans sacrifices to uphold freedom and liberty in the Korean 
Peninsula will never be forgotten.
I rise today with a heavy heart to honor 
the memory of Anthony Ferguson, a dedicated public servant who was 
killed in the line of duty while serving as a police officer in my 
district.
  Officer Ferguson spent eleven years serving his community as a member 
of the Alamogordo Police Department. As a field training officer in the 
patrol division, he trained countless other officers to protect and 
serve. On July 16, 2023, Officer Ferguson was senselessly killed in 
action while protecting his fellow New Mexicans.
  Officer Ferguson is remembered by his family, friends, and fellow 
officers as loyal and courageous in the performance of his duties. His 
sacrifice in the line of duty serves as a solemn reminder of the 
bravery and commitment of our law enforcement officers. His loss is 
felt across the state, and my deepest condolences go out to all who 
knew and loved him.
  We owe a debt of gratitude to our law enforcement officers that can 
never be fully repaid. We must strive to honor Officer Fergusons 
memory by continuing to support and appreciate those who put their 
lives on the line every day to keep our communities safe.
  On behalf of the great people of New Mexicos 2nd Congressional 
District, I thank Officer Ferguson for his service, and his ultimate 
sacrifice for the community of Alamogordo. We must not let his bravery 
be forgotten.
I rise today in honor of the Ray-Fre Senior 
Citizens Club in Raymond, New Hampshire, for the 50th anniversary of 
their location on Main Street and the 55th anniversary of the clubs 
founding. Ray-Fre was established in 1968 when the Raymond and Fremont 
senior centers chose to combine. By 1973, they had a permanent 
location, elected officers, and by-laws. Ray-Fre offers a variety of 
games, activities, and volunteer opportunities open to those 55+ 
including line dancing, cribbage, Meals-on-Wheels, and knitting. Their 
continuous community-building, festivities, and engagement 
opportunities help our seniors age gracefully and with dignity, 
connecting them with friends and family in a lively atmosphere.
  Aside from games and festivities, Ray-Fre offers our seniors the 
opportunity to maintain a healthy lifestyle, learn about new 
technology, and participate in local community service. Each week, 
members may take part in walking groups or video exercises, participate 
in computer classes to remain fluent in technology and learn new 
skills, or volunteer for Meals-on-Wheels. Additionally, the knitting 
group meets Mondays to make hats for cancer survivors, infants, and the 
homeless and provided over 1,900 articles in 2021. Ray-Fres impact 
extends far beyond their seniors and strives to make a difference in 
the community.
  On behalf of the constituents of New Hampshires First Congressional 
District, I commend Ray-Fre for their devotion to community-building, 
service, and engagement. Their 55 years as a club complements their 
immeasurable positive impact on the community. I greatly appreciate the 
work they do for our seniors and the opportunities provided to them.
I rise today to honor Trooper Jeffrey 
Dunlap, a devoted public servant, for his heroic actions on the evening 
of Monday, July 3. For more than 13 years, Trooper Dunlap has served in 
the North Carolina State Highway Patrol, risking his life every day to 
protect and serve the people of Buncombe County.
  On the evening of July 3rd, Trooper Dunlap stopped his vehicle to 
assist a stranded motorist on I-26 West. In a horrific turn of events, 
the motorist pulled out a gun and shot Trooper Dunlap in the chest. 
Thankfully, the round was stopped by Trooper Dunlaps bulletproof vest, 
and he was able to swifty return fire. In the face of imminent danger, 
Trooper Dunlap neutralized the threat, saving his own life and 
protecting the lives of innocent bystanders. Following the shooting, 
Trooper Dunlap was taken to a local hospital and has since been 
discharged.
  The true essence of heroism is the willingness to sacrifice ones own 
personal safety for the protection of others. Trooper Dunlap has and 
will continue to show up to work every day willing to place himself in 
danger for the greater good. I thank Trooper Dunlap, for exemplifying 
what it means to protect and serve.
today, I introduce the National Capital 
Planning Commission District of Columbia Home Rule Act. This bill would 
remove the authority of the National Capital Planning Commission 
(NCPC), a federal agency, to review or approve the development of 
District of Columbia-owned real property. This bill would also remove 
the requirement that the D.C. Mayor get NCPCs approval before selling 
D.C.-owned real property and allow D.C. agencies to transfer 
jurisdiction over D.C.-owned real property among themselves without 
NCPCs approval.
  Under federal law, NCPC has approval authority for the development of 
D.C.-owned buildings located in the ``central area, including the 
location, height, bulk, number of stories and size of such buildings. 
D.C. is required to consult with NCPC on D.C.-owned buildings outside 
the central area, but NCPC has only advisory authority in those areas. 
The central area is defined by the concurrent action of NCPC and the 
D.C. Council and currently consists of the Downtown and Shaw Urban 
Renewal Areas.
  NCPCs authority over D.C.-owned real property is unnecessary, as 
demonstrated by the virtual absence of its use to disapprove sales or 
development, and violates D.C. home rule. The federal government should 
not be able to slow or block the development of D.C.-owned real 
property or add to the cost of development.
  This bill is an important step to increase home rule for D.C. I urge 
my colleagues to support this bill.
I missed the vote because I was meeting 
with constituents. Had I been present, I would have voted NAY on Roll 
Call No. 379.
I rise today to congratulate Southern Company 
and all of the co-owners on their historic accomplishment of Unit 3 at 
Plant Vogtle officially coming online this week.
  Plant Vogtle, located in Georgias 12th District, is now home to the 
first newly-constructed nuclear unit in the United States in more than 
30 years, with Unit 4 shortly to follow.
  Announced earlier this week, Unit 3 is fully operational and will 
provide 24/7 baseload power to 500,000 Georgia homes and businesses for 
decades to come.
  A project of this magnitude does not come to fruition easily, but the 
persistent efforts and dedication since 2012 have culminated in what 
can only be defined as a major win for all Georgians and America as a 
whole.
  Seeing the results of the meaningful collaboration and hard work that 
made this possible is truly a blessing.
  I am beyond proud that Georgia-12 is leading the way in Americas 
nuclear energy expansion; congratulations to Southern Company, 
Oglethorpe Power Company, MEAG Power, and all involved for this 
historic accomplishment.
I rise today to recognize and honor an 
outstanding individual in my district, Bremerton City Councilmember, 
Michael Goodnow. This year marks a significant milestone as he helps 
organize the 27th Kitsap Pride Festival, his 25th year assisting, a 
momentous occasion that celebrates diversity, inclusion, and equality 
in our community.
  Councilmember Goodnow has been an unwavering champion for the rights 
and well-being of the LGBTQ+ community in Bremerton and beyond. Through 
his tireless efforts and dedication, he has fostered a spirit of unity 
and acceptance, creating a safe and welcoming environment for all 
individuals, regardless of their sexual orientation or gender identity.
  Beyond his role in organizing the Kitsap Pride Festival, 
Councilmember Goodnow has been a strong advocate for social justice 
issues throughout his tenure in public service. His commitment to 
equality extends far beyond this event, as he actively works to promote 
equal rights, combat discrimination, and improve the lives of 
marginalized communities.
  Some of the roles hes had in the community include the Executive 
Director of the Roxy Theatre, Director of the Kitsap County AIDS 
Foundation, Project Coordinator at the Pride Foundation of Seattle, and 
Coordinator at the Kitsap Health District, working on HIV prevention in 
the late 1990s. Michael is also Bremertons first openly gay elected 
City Councilman and first openly gay City Council President.
, I am honored to join my constituents in congratulating 
Councilmember Michael Goodnow on this remarkable milestone. His 
unwavering commitment to equality and inclusivity serves as an 
inspiration to us all. May we continue to support and uplift 
individuals like Councilmember Goodnow, who work tirelessly to build a 
more just and equitable community for everyone.
I rise today to recognize Mrs. Amanda 
(Hall) Earl for her dedication to the people of Californias 22nd 
Congressional District and to thank her for her public service to our 
country.
, Texas to Doug and Krista Hall. After 
graduating high school, she would go on to attend the University of 
Oklahoma, where she became a sister of the Gamma Phi Beta Sorority. In 
2014, she graduated with a Bachelor of Arts in journalism and public 
relations. Following her graduation, Mrs. Earl began her political 
career working on state campaigns across Oklahoma. Eventually, her 
outstanding work ethic and grasp of public policy issues led her to 
Washington, where she would begin working as a Research Assistant for 
the Senate Committee on Environment and Public Works, under the 
leadership of Chairman James Inhofe.
  Shortly after, she joined Senator Inhofes personal office as a 
Legislative Assistant, working on major policy issues such as energy 
and water. Mrs. Earl worked under Senator Inhofe until 2019, when she 
left the Senate to become a Senior Advisor at the U.S. Department of 
the Interior, Office of Congressional and Legislative Affairs, where 
she worked on the passage of the Great American Outdoors Act, 
Endangered Species Act regulatory reforms, and oversight of the 
National Park Service. Mrs. Earl joined my Washington D.C. office at 
the beginning of the 117th Congress, serving as my Legislative 
Director. Her portfolio included some of the most important issues for 
the 22nd district, such as energy,

water, trade, environmental work, healthcare, and agriculture.
  Not only did Mrs. Earl have an incredible grasp of these complex and 
challenging issues, but she dedicated an enormous amount of time to 
building relationships with relevant stakeholders in the Central 
Valley--even traveling to the district multiple times to meet with 
farmers, energy producers, hospital leaders, and more. She was also 
critical in leading my legislative teams work on the House 
Appropriations Committee, ensuring the Central Valley had a seat at the 
table when it came to funding the federal government.
  One of her most significant accomplishments during her time in my 
office was her leadership on the Working to Advance Tangible and 
Effective Reforms (WATER) for California Act. This sweeping water 
legislation was made possible because of the months of effort on behalf 
of Mrs. Earl, and I am incredibly grateful for her work on this issue 
which is so critical for Central Valley communities and our local 
economy. After nearly a decade spent in both Oklahoma and Washington 
D.C., Mrs. Earl would depart my office in March of this year and return 
to her beloved home state of Texas with her husband, Andrew. While her 
welcoming personality, signature quick wit, and leadership in our 
office are all greatly missed, I am incredibly excited for Mrs. Earl as 
she begins this exciting new chapter of her life. Knowing Amanda, her 
character, work ethic, and compassion for others, I have no doubt there 
are many great things ahead for her.
, I ask my colleagues in the United States House of 
Representatives to join me in honoring Mrs. Amanda (Hall) Earl for her 
service to our country and wishing her the very best in this next 
chapter of her life.
I rise to recognize and congratulate 
the congregation of the Monongahela Church of the Nazarene in 
Monongahela, Pennsylvania for 100 years of service to God and the 
surrounding community.
  The Monongahela Church of the Nazarene was originally organized with 
24 members on July 25, 1923, the small group of members sought Gods 
will for their lives. The congregation held tent meetings until the 
physical church was built and established nearly a decade later. Rev. 
Frank Strickler from the California Church of the Nazarene, aided by 
David Mitchell, became the Churchs first Pastor. Throughout the years, 
the church was blessed with the spiritual leadership of nine Pastors.
  In 2000, Reverend Raymond DiCamillo became the current Pastor of the 
church. Under his leadership, the Monongahela Church of the Nazarene 
remains committed to reaching the lost, helping those in need, and 
loving those they meet. With the Holy Spirit guiding them, they look 
forward to building on this storied history for the next 100 years.
, the Monongahela Church of the Nazarenes story is deeply 
rooted in our great Nations origins. On behalf of the people of 
Pennsylvanias 14th Congressional District, I congratulate them on 
their 100th anniversary and thank them for their service to 
southwestern Pennsylvanias faith community.
I rise today to pay tribute to a faithful 
servant, trusted counselor, and cherished community leader, Deacon 
Benjamin ``Ben Swinton. Deacon Swinton, a lifelong friend and 
supporter, transitioned from this life on July 26, 2023, in Sumter, 
South Carolina. His compassion and kindness will be sorely missed.
10, 1929, in Sumter, South 
Carolina. He attended Sumter City Schools and graduated from Lincoln 
High School in 1954, where he was a gifted athlete. Upon graduating 
high school, Mr. Swinton pursued higher education at North Carolina A&amp;T 
University and completed his coursework at Morris College in Sumter, 
graduating Magnum Cum Laude. Mr. Swinton also dutifully served our 
nation in the United States Army.
  After graduating from Morris College, Mr. Swinton pursued a career in 
public service. He served as a counselor and planner at the Wateree 
Community Actions Agency before joining the South Carolina Vocational 
Rehabilitation Center, where he served for 21 years before his 
retirement. In these capacities, Mr. Swinton was uplifting to many 
members of the Sumter community.
  Deacon Swinton was a man of faith. He was a lifelong member of the 
Salem Missionary Baptist Church and served the Church as a Sunday 
School teacher, a combined choir member, the Director of Christian 
Education, and Sunday School Superintendent. Additionally, he served on 
the Deacon Board with distinction.
a dedicated family man. He is survived by his 
loving wife, Dollie Woods Swinton to whom he was married for 68 years. 
Together they had 1 son, Benjamin Anthony Swinton, who preceded him in 
death. He is also survived by a daughter, Juanita Balls Williams, 
brothers Harry W. Swinton and Roosevelt (Naomi) Swinton, and many 
grandchildren, great-grandchildren, nieces, and nephews.

  Mr, Speaker, I ask that our colleagues join me in honoring the 
remarkable life of Deacon Benjamin Swinton. His long life of service as 
a counselor and spiritual leader made an indelible impact on his 
community and will be remembered by all who were fortunate to know him.