this year the Dayton Dragons 
celebrate their 25th season of baseball in my hometown of Dayton, Ohio. 
One of my proudest achievements as mayor of Dayton was building the 
baseball stadium and working with the Dragons ownership to bring the 
team to the city.
  The Dragons have helped revitalize downtown Dayton. They have given 
baseball fans 25 seasons of enjoyable family entertainment, and 
continue to generate an enormous

amount of pride and spirit throughout the community.
  No professional team in any sport can match the number of consecutive 
sellouts the Dragons have accumulated. Their record-breaking sellout 
streak continues to stand as the longest in professional sports 
history.
, I include in the Record my op-ed article titled, ``The 
Story of How the Dayton Dragons Came To Be, from the Dayton Daily 
News:

             The Story of How the Dayton Dragons Came To Be

       As the Dayton Dragons prepare to take the field for the 
     2025 season, we celebrate sellout crowds and an out-of-this-
     world atmosphere with incredible fanfare, enjoyed by families 
     who have made lifelong memories with the magic of Day Air 
     Park.
       Most nights are at full capacity. The Dragons have sold out 
     1,573 consecutive home games since arriving in Dayton--the 
     longest streak in North American professional sports history.
       As we celebrate 25 seasons of the Dayton Dragons, we 
     recognize how far our city has come. What was once a vision 
     for renewal has become a reality, with downtown Dayton now a 
     hub of activity, culture, and economic opportunity. The 
     Dragons have played a central role in that transformation, 
     proving that baseball can be more than just a game--it can be 
     a driving force for positive change.
       During my second term as Mayor, our community committed to 
     revitalize downtown with Riverscape, the Schuster Center, the 
     baseball stadium, and new downtown housing. What we have 
     today is a vibrant city, and now its hard to imagine Dayton 
     without the Dragons. However, there was a time when it 
     appeared the city would never field a team.
       Prior to the Dayton Dragons, there were several failed 
     attempts to bring a baseball team to Dayton and to build a 
     stadium. Many of these attempts came from out-of-town groups 
     with promises of never-realized funding, unbuildable stadium 
     designs, and management groups unable to secure Major League 
     approvals.
       Most of the proposals came with all the risk assumed by the 
     Dayton taxpayer. Although our community believed in the 
     promise of a new stadium and a baseball team, the public was 
     skeptical and looking for the right partner and the right 
     deal.
       By the time Mandalay Sports Entertainment came to town, our 
     community was organized, prepared and had a plan. As Mayor, 
     on behalf of our community team, I proposed a unique 
     structure for a deal. Dayton would agree to own and lease a 
     stadium to the team, if the team built the stadium at a fixed 
     price to the City of Dayton, assume all cost overruns, and be 
     responsible for operational, maintenance, and capital costs--
     capping the risk to the Dayton taxpayers.
       Mandalay agreed and delivered. The Dayton Dragons stadium 
     deal ended up being the only stadium in the state that came 
     in on-budget to the taxpayers.
       For the 25 years of the Dayton Dragons success, there has 
     been one leader that has delivered for our community: the 
     President and General Manager for the team, Bob Murphy.
       Murphy had the responsibility for delivering the 
     construction of the stadium, managing the team, overseeing 
     the stadium, and delivering entertainment every night for our 
     community. He has become a part of our community and has 
     stayed through three consecutive ownership groups.
       On opening day 25 seasons ago, as Mayor, I stood on the 
     ballfield with our community negotiating team of City 
     Commissioner Bootsie Neil, City Manager Valerie Lemme, 
     Economic Development Director Joe Tuss, Montgomery County 
     Commissioner Vicky Pegg, Montgomery County Administrator Deb 
     Feldman, Dayton Chamber of Commerce President Phil Parker, 
     Fifth-Third Bank President Dan Sadlier, and Downtown Dayton 
     Partnership President Maureen Pero, tipping our ball caps to 
     Bob Murphy, thanking him for his accomplishment of delivering 
     on his promise of a stadium for the Dragons in downtown 
     Dayton.
       I am proud of the role I played in bringing the Dayton 
     Dragons to our city, but even prouder of what they have meant 
     to our community.
today, I rise to congratulate WJBC as they 
reach a monumental milestone. For 100 years, WJBC has been the voice of 
McLean County. The hosts have dedicated themselves to providing 
residents of Central Illinois with timely and reliable news to keep the 
public informed.
  Local radio stations are more important than ever. They bring a 
unique, personal, and powerful form of communication to their audience. 
WJBC serves as a bridge between communities, providing a unique space 
where local stories, issues, and voices can be heard.
  WJBC has welcomed Presidents, governors, politicians, celebrities, 
and local voices to keep us informed about public events and connect 
our community.
  The station has been home to legendary on-air personalities, 
including Don Newberg, Don Munson, Steve Vogel, Ken Behrens, Dick 
Luedke, Scott Laughlin, and current morning host Scott Miller, who have 
all enriched the lives of listeners and made significant contributions 
to the communities and organizations across Central Illinois.
  This is a monumental moment for WJBC, and I congratulate them on 
their 100 years of success. I look forward to listening to WJBC for 
many more years to come.
I rise today to honor the Kilgore College 
Rangerettes and celebrate two extraordinary milestones: the 30th 
anniversary of the 54th line, the Class of 1995, and the 85th 
anniversary of this world-renowned team.
  Founded in 1940 by Gussie Nell Davis, the Rangerettes were the first 
precision dance team to perform during a college football halftime 
show. With their high kicks, jump splits, and iconic red, white, and 
blue uniforms, they have set a standard for discipline and excellence 
for over eight decades.
  The Class of 1995 holds a special place in this legacy as the first 
to perform under Director Dana Blair and Assistant Director Shelley 
Wayne, whose leadership continues to shape the Rangerettes today. Many 
of these teammates became dance and drill team instructors, passing on 
the discipline and artistry instilled during their time as Rangerettes.
  Their sophomore year featured unforgettable moments, including 
performances in France, at the Texas State Fair Gala, and alongside 
legends like Willie Nelson. Their finale performance to Donna Summers 
``Last Dance remains an emotional highlight, with one teammate 
saying, ``I could cry thinking about this song. As they often say, 
``Once a Rangerette, always a Rangerette.
  For 85 years, the Rangerettes have been ambassadors of Texas culture, 
blending grace and precision to inspire generations. Mr. Speaker, I ask 
my colleagues to join me in honoring the Kilgore College Rangerettes, 
the Class of 1995, and their lasting legacy of excellence.
I rise today to honor 
Gustavo Avina, whom I have named the California 4th Districts 2025 
Climate Crisis Champion of the Year for Napa County because of his 
tireless dedication to sustainable viticulture and environmental 
stewardship.
, Mexico, and immigrated to the United 
States with his wife, Blanca, in 1988. They settled in our Napa Valley, 
where they raised their two children, Gustavo Jr. and Jessica. Mr. 
Avina began working with some of the finest vineyard management 
programs in the region before joining Pine Ridge Vineyards in 2003. His 
deep connection to the land and commitment to sustainability led to his 
promotion to Viticulture Director for the vineyard in 2019.
  With over 30 years of experience, Mr. Avina has helped shape Pine 
Ridge Vineyards into a leader in sustainable viticulture. He walks 
every vineyard block weekly, cultivating grapes with care, precision, 
and a firm belief in environmental responsibility. Under his 
leadership, Pine Ridge Vineyards has implemented industry-leading 
sustainability efforts, transitioning to dry farming, achieving Napa 
Green Vineyard certification, applying compost and practicing proactive 
forest management and committing to carbon neutrality.
a mentor to others on climate-smart 
agriculture. He leads Pine Ridges dry farming pilot program and has 
made the commitment to eventually transition all the vineyards 
replants to dry farming. Mr. Avina presented on these efforts at the 
2024 Napa Green ``Future of Water summit and will present at the 2025 
Regeneration, Innovation, Sustainability, Empowerment (RISE) Climate 
and Wine Symposium, establishing himself as a trusted voice in 
sustainable viticulture in our wine community.
  Beyond his work in the vineyard. Mr. Avina is committed to educating 
and mentoring individuals in our agriculture community. As a member of 
the Napa Valley Farmworker Foundations Education Committee and as a 
mentor in the organizations Fields of Opportunity program, Mr. Avina 
has helped provide educational and professional development 
opportunities to over 3,000 farmworkers annually. He has developed and 
led classes, seminars, and field days with the organization, covering 
topics from irrigation and vineyard management to climate science and 
innovation. Mr. Avina also helped launch the Napa Valley Farmworker 
Foundations Climate Science Seminar Series, equipping farmworkers with 
tools to adapt to extreme weather and build resilience in the face of 
climate change.
  Additionally. Mr. Avina has served as a pruning contest judge for the 
Napa Valley Farmworker Foundations STOMP fundraiser and previously 
served as secretary of the English Learners Advisory Committee for the 
St. Helena School District. When he is not in the vineyard or the 
classroom, Mr. Avina enjoys cheering on Gustavo Jr. at his college 
soccer games and celebrating the achievements of Jessica, a nurse 
practitioner and soon-to-be mother.
Gustavo Avinas leadership in sustainable farming and 
dedication to Napa Valleys farmworker community set a powerful 
example. His leadership in carbon neutrality efforts, dry farming 
mentorship and farmworker education exemplifies the positive impact an 
individual can have on their industry and community. Therefore, it is 
fitting that we honor him here today as Napa Countys 2025 Climate 
Crisis Champion of the Year.
I rise today to honor 
Justina Salinas, whom I have named the California 4th Districts 2025 
Climate Crisis Champion of the Year for Solano County in recognition of 
her visionary leadership in regenerative agriculture, habitat 
restoration, and environmental advocacy.
  Born in Sacramento, California, Ms. Salinas graduated from the 
American School of London and earned her bachelors degree from Santa 
Clara University, where she majored in both E-commerce and Studio Art, 
with additional minors in Entrepreneurship and Retail Management. 
Inspired by her grandparents who immigrated to California from 
Guanajuato, Mexico, in the 1960s and worked in the fields with a 
profound respect for nature, Ms. Salinas founded Araceli Farms in 2017, 
a small lavender farm in Dixon.
  What began as a family-run venture evolved into a model of 
environmental restoration for all. Ms. Salinas has transformed her farm 
into a thriving native grassland meadow, prioritizing regenerative 
agriculture practices including soil health restoration, dry farming, 
biodiversity conservation, no till farming, integrated rotational 
grazing, natural pest management, and native plant reintegration. Her 
farm has become a haven for the native species of our Solano County, 
with blue belly lizards, egrets, herons, red-tailed hawks, barn owls, 
and other species all thriving on the property. By intentionally 
choosing not to disturb the soil, Ms. Salinas has fostered a living, 
nutrient-rich environment that has become a sanctuary for wildlife and 
a beacon of sustainable land stewardship.
Her practices reflect 
a commitment to ethical farming, water conservation, and environmental 
justice, embodying a new model of agriculture that harmonizes 
production with ecological renewal. Ms. Salinas also acknowledges the 
privilege of her access to land. She has made it a mission for Araceli 
Farms to serve as a space for reflection, learning, and community 
connection, fostering opportunities for young people and aspiring 
farmers to engage with the natural world.
  Beyond her farm, Ms. Salinas is an active member of the Community 
Alliance with Family Farmers (CAFF) Policy Committee and the California 
Native Plant Society. She volunteers with organizations like the 
Research Conservation District, participates in native plant 
restoration projects, and has lent her voice to lobbying efforts in 
Sacramento, advocating for regenerative agriculture and sustainable 
food systems to leaders at the California State Capital. Additionally, 
, hospitals, and animal 
rescues, cares for the elderly, supports underprivileged youth, and 
regularly participates in trash cleanups in our community.
, Justina Salinas reminds us that farming is more than a 
profession, rather a relationship with the land and a call to 
stewardship. Her resilience, kindness, and unwavering dedication to 
ecological justice make her a powerful role model in Solano County and 
beyond. For these reasons and more, it is fitting and proper that we 
recognize her today as Solano Countys 2025 Climate Crisis Champion of 
the Year.
I rise today to honor Robert 
Ashe, whom I have named the California 4th Districts 2025 Climate 
Crisis Champion of the Year for Sonoma County for his extensive 
volunteer efforts to restore and protect the Santa Rosa Creek and 
surrounding areas. He exemplifies the power of grassroots environmental 
stewardship as seen through founding the Friends of the Prince Memorial 
Greenway.
, California. He attended 
Antelope Valley College, where he studied police administration before 
working for over 35 years in the automotive parts industry in Los 
Angeles. After moving to Sonoma County, Mr. Ashe found a new calling as 
a custodian at Park Side Elementary School in Sebastopol, where he 
worked for 13 years. Known affectionately as ``Mr. Bob, he was more 
than just a caretaker, serving as a mentor, a friend and an educator to 
those around him. Mr. Ashe led efforts on

recycling, composting and environmental responsibility, instilling in 
students a deep respect for sustainability.
  In 2020, Mr. Ashe turned his passion for environmental care into 
action by volunteering at the Prince Memorial Greenway, a beloved but 
often overlooked natural space in our city of Santa Rosa. What began as 
simple trash cleanups soon expanded into a comprehensive restoration 
effort. Mr. Ashe currently dedicates an average of 25 hours a week to 
maintaining the Greenway and its surrounding parks, trails and creek 
areas. His work includes vegetation management, graffiti removal, trail 
upkeep and clearing potential hazards, all critical efforts in helping 
the Greenway remain a safe and thriving space for residents and 
wildlife alike.
  Recognizing the power of collective action, Mr. Ashe founded the 
Friends of the Prince Memorial Greenway, a volunteer group dedicated to 
the ongoing restoration and beautification of the area in 2023. Under 
his leadership, the group contributes over 125 volunteer hours per 
month to cleaning and maintaining the Greenway. With each passing 
season, the number of volunteers continues to grow as more community 
members are inspired to join the cause. Beyond cleanup efforts, the 
Friends of the Prince Memorial Greenway advocates for the Greenways 
role in connecting downtown residents and businesses, bringing people 
together through nature, art and sustainable transportation 
initiatives.
He is a 
dedicated and compassionate member of our community, always willing to 
lend a hand to those in need. His leadership is not only measured in 
the number of volunteer hours logged or the pounds of trash he removes, 
but in the inspiration, he provides to others. Whether through his 
advocacy, mentorship or hands-on service, Mr. Ashe has shown one 
individuals commitment to their community can create lasting change.
, Robert Ashes dedication to environmental stewardship 
and public service embodies the spirit of the Climate Crisis Champion 
of the Year award. His work to rehabilitate and maintain Sonoma 
Countys natural spaces ensures these cherished environments remain 
accessible, clean and beautiful for future generations of our 
community. It is fitting and proper that we recognize him today as 
Sonoma Countys 2025 Climate Crisis Champion of the Year.
I rise today to honor the exceptional work 
of the officers of the Prince William County Police Department in the 
recent arrest of a top MS-13 leader in Virginias Seventh District.
  Their relentless dedication to public safety and professionalism in 
the face of danger has not only made our communities safer but has also 
set a shining example of the effectiveness of law enforcement in 
confronting the serious threat posed by violent criminal organizations.
  MS-13 is known for its brutal crimes, including drug trafficking, 
extortion, human trafficking, and violence that threatens communities 
in the Seventh District and across our country. Their reach and impact 
are deeply concerning, and the work of our law enforcement agencies to 
dismantle their operations is of utmost importance.
  This particular arrest was the result of months of careful 
investigation, intelligence gathering, and coordination between local, 
state, and federal law enforcement agencies. The operation carried out 
by the Prince William County Police Department and their partners is a 
testament to the hard work, expertise, and unwavering commitment of law 
enforcement professionals who put their lives on the line every day to 
protect our families. Todays success is not only a victory for law 
enforcement but a significant win for public safety across Virginias 
Seventh District and beyond.
  As a former prosecutor, I know how critical it is to support law 
enforcement in their efforts to combat violent crime and ensure the 
safety of our communities. This is why I have consistently advocated 
for bipartisan legislation that equips law enforcement with the 
necessary tools and resources to do their jobs effectively. The urgency 
to get violent criminals

off our streets is exactly why I will continue to champion policies 
that prioritize public safety and law enforcement.
  It is because of the bravery and hard work of the Prince William 
County Police Department and their partners that Virginias Seventh 
District--and our entire Nation--is safer today. Their commitment to 
keeping our neighborhoods safe is a model we should all be proud of.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in honoring the Prince 
William County Police Department for their exceptional service and 
commitment to ensuring the safety of our communities. Their bravery and 
professionalism deserve our deepest recognition and thanks.
I rise today to honor 
Vacaville City Manager Aaron Busch, an esteemed member of our Solano 
County community. His 37 years of public service and his tireless 
dedication to our community exemplify why he is being honored today.
  Aaron Busch is a lifelong Californian, having studied geography with 
an emphasis in Urban Planning at Fresno State University before 
beginning a career in city planning. His first role in local government 
was as an Assistant/Associate Planner with the City of Rancho Mirage. 
In 2017, Mr. Busch joined the City of Vacaville as Assistant City 
Manager, where he oversaw the Community Development and Parks and 
Recreation Departments and eventually rose to the rank of city manager 
where he has served since.
Some of his 
accomplishments while in office include implementing the City of 
Vacavilles Biotechnology and Advanced Manufacturing Initiative, which 
has brought in nearly $68 million in private investments, as well as 
creating the COV Connect community engagement program. Mr. Busch was 
also responsible for distributing over $12 million in Federal American 
Rescue Plan Act (ARPA) funds to aid community recovery from the impacts 
of the COVID-19 pandemic. In addition, Mr. Busch oversaw the 
advancement of numerous other projects including the building of Fire 
Station 76 and an audit of the Vacaville Police Department. His forward 
thinking and attention to the needs of the citys residents have made 
him instrumental in advancing the City of Vacaville as a prime 
destination for families, professionals, and retirees alike.
--
he is well known around the City of Vacaville as ``The Coach for his 
leadership and commitment to the residents of the city. His forward 
thinking and natural leadership make him a fixture in the community.
, and they have 5 children and 
5 grandchildren. He looks forward to spending more time with them in 
retirement, along with more golfing, travelling, and gardening.
, it is both fitting and proper that we recognize Mr. 
Busch for his commitment to public service and honor his career in 
which he strived to better our community here today.
I rise in opposition to H.R. 1526, the No 
Rogue Rulings Act of 2025.
  Just as House and Senate Republicans have ceded their constitutional 
responsibility to conduct oversight on the Executive Branch, 
Republicans want to force federal judges to give up their power of 
judicial review. The duty and responsibility of federal courts is to 
review laws and policies that have a national impact. Federal courts 
are not local courts. By design their role is national and is not 
limited to one state or one county. Limiting the ability of federal 
courts to carry out their duty would undermine the rights and freedoms 
of all Americans.
  The No Rogue Rulings Act of 2025 would prevent federal district court 
judges from providing nationwide injunction relief when one of 
President Trumps executive orders, policies, or actions violates 
peoples constitutional rights and freedoms. Nationwide injunctions are 
issued against the federal government when its actions are 
unconstitutional and have a broad national effect. If a federal judge 
can no longer issue a national injunction, the Administration could 
continue to violate the rights of the American people until the case 
reaches the Supreme Court. This bill is designed to drastically limit 
federal judges ability to prevent unconstitutional actions from doing 
broad harm. It is about giving more power to Donald Trump.
  Donald Trump is losing in court because he keeps trying to do 
unlawful and unconstitutional things, not because of judicial 
overreach. This bill a scheme to give more power to the President, 
making it easier for him to carry out his illegal actions without 
consequence.
  I urge my colleagues to reject this bill.
I have the honor of representing Ohios 9th 
Congressional District, a region known for its patriotic spirit, strong 
civic institutions, and deep respect for those who have served our 
Nation in uniform. Today, I am privileged to recognize a distinguished 
leader and devoted advocate from our community--Cindy Rice, National 
President of the AMVETS Ladies Auxiliary.
  Whereas, Cindy Rice, a lifelong resident of Ohio and a dedicated 
advocate for veterans and their families, was elected National 
President of the AMVETS Ladies Auxiliary in August 2024, bringing with 
her decades of service, compassion, and unwavering commitment to the 
AMVETS mission; and
  Whereas, Cindy Rices journey of service began in 1984 when she 
joined AMVETS Ladies Auxiliary Post 22 in Vermilion, Ohio, becoming a 
life member in 1999, and since then, has risen through the ranks of 
leadership at the local, district, state, and national levels, 
including serving as Department President of Ohio in 2015; and
  Whereas, Madam President has held numerous distinguished national 
positions, including National Historian, National Hospital Chair, 
National Honors and Awards Chair, and Vice President at all levels, as 
well as two terms as National Sergeant of Arms--roles in which she 
exemplified leadership, humility, and heartfelt service; and
  Whereas, her steadfast volunteerism, including at the Sandusky Ohio 
Veterans Home, and her continued leadership as President of Ohio AMVETS 
Charities and Secretary of her local Auxiliary, reflect her deep and 
abiding dedication to the well-being of our veterans and their 
families; and
  Whereas, Cindy Rice has played an instrumental role in raising funds 
and awareness for vital causes such as PAWS With a Cause, the John 
Tracy Center, St. Jude Childrens Hospital, Founding Forward, and the 
AMVETS Scholarship Program, all while promoting the core values of the 
Auxiliary and strengthening the AMVETS family across the country; and
  Whereas, during her presidency, Cindy has chosen the ``AMVETS 
Diabetes Research Center at Ohio University as her national project, 
dedicating this year of service to veterans, Auxiliary members, and 
family affected by diabetes, with the belief that Together We Can work 
toward a cure for this devastating disease; and
  Whereas, Cindy Rices eligibility for AMVETS stems from her proud 
lineage of service--her father, a World War II Army Veteran, and her 
husband, Roger, a U.S. Navy Veteran--and is further honored by two 
nephews currently serving in the U.S. Marine Corps; and
  Whereas, with 48 years of experience in the field of dentistry, Cindy 
continues to serve her community even in retirement, offering her time 
and skills where needed and bringing the same care and diligence to her 
professional life as she has to her AMVETS mission; and
  Whereas, Cindy Rice has traveled extensively throughout the United 
States to visit AMVETS Departments and Auxiliaries, sharing her 
message, promoting her project, and uplifting all with her inspiring 
theme--Together We Can;
  Now, therefore, I, Congresswoman Marcy Kaptur, proudly recognize and 
commend Cindy Rice, National President of the AMVETS Ladies Auxiliary, 
for her outstanding service, leadership, and unwavering dedication to 
our veterans and their families. May her legacy of compassion, 
advocacy, and tireless commitment continue to inspire current and 
future generations of Auxiliary members across the nation.

  In witness whereof, I have hereunto set my hand to honor Cindy Rice 
for her exceptional contributions and steadfast devotion to the AMVETS 
community and to the service of our great Nation.
I rise today to recognize Hollister City 
Administrator Rick Ziegenfuss, who is retiring this month after 23 
years in this position.
a native of Cedar Falls, Iowa, but came to Missouri 
when he took his Army Infantry basic training at Ft. Leonard Wood in 
central Missouri. During his 22-year Army career, he graduated from 
Infantry Officer Candidate School, Infantry Officer Basic Course, 
Infantry Officer Advanced Course, and the Armys Command and General 
Staff College, where he graduated with honors. He held a series of 
command positions and earned numerous service awards and medals. He was 
discharged honorably as a Lieutenant Colonel.
  Following his military service, Mr. Ziegenfuss started an 
environmental company, which he subsequently sold, was vice president 
of operations for Creative Printing and Design, was owner and president 
of Ameri Trade Corp., and then became the director of economic 
development for the City of Hollister before he was promoted to city 
administrator.
a Bachelor of Arts in personnel management from 
Mary Crest College in Davenport, Iowa. He has served on multiple boards 
in the Branson, Missouri, area and has been recognized with the 
Missouri Award, the Holllister Area Chamber of Commerce Heart of 
Hollister Award, the Branson Lakes Area Chamber of Commerce Pioneer and 
Community Spirit awards, and the True American Hero Award from the 
Branson Veterans Task Force.
, and they have 
three daughters; Beth, Brooke, and Brittney; a stepdaughter, Jordan; a 
stepson, Logan; six grandchildren; and 10 great-grandchildren.
  Id like to congratulate Mr. Ziegenfuss on his outstanding career. 
Please join me in thanking him for his many years of service to others 
and wishing him well on his retirement.
I rise today to honor the remarkable career 
of Peter Robinson, the Vice President for Government and Community 
Relations at the University of Rochester, who retired at the end of 
March after more than 35 years of exceptional service.
  Throughout his tenure, Peter played a vital role in advancing the 
Universitys mission, leading its federal, state, and community 
relations efforts with great skill and dedication. Among his many 
achievements, he was instrumental in the Universitys affiliation with 
NextCorps, strengthening support for the Laboratory for Laser 
Energetics, and building lasting partnerships with state and local 
leaders.
  Peters advocacy helped secure hundreds of millions of dollars in 
funding for the University and Medical Center including $50 million for 
the Saunders Research Building and $50 million for the Emergency and 
Inpatient Tower. He has also secured major funding for the Eastman 
School of Music expansion, Wegmans Hall, the Goergen Institute for Data 
Science and Artificial Intelligence, and the Kornberg and Del Monte 
Biomedical Research Buildings.
  Beyond his professional contributions, Peter served for 30 years in 
the New York Army National Guard, retiring with the rank of colonel. 
His deep commitment to veterans issues continued through his work with 
the Universitys Veterans Alliance, demonstrating his enduring 
dedication to service.
  I have known Peter since the start of my career and have always 
admired his insightful and strategic approach to complex legislative 
matters. His numerous contributions to the University and our community 
are immeasurable. He has built an incredible legacy that will 
strengthen and inspire future generations.
  As he embarks on the next chapter, I extend my deepest gratitude for 
his decades of service and unwavering leadership. On behalf of the 
University of Rochester community and all those who have benefited from 
his work, I wish Peter Robinson all the best in his retirement.
I rise today to recognize the 2025 Class 1A 
Minnesota State Girls Hockey Champions: the Dodge County Wildcats.
  On February 22nd, the team won their first-ever state title at the 
Xcel Energy Center in a suspenseful overtime game against Warroad. The 
Wildcats claimed the win with a 4-3 final score.
  The deciding goal almost went unnoticed, sneaking over the goal line 
during a dramatic scramble at the net. Warroad came away with the puck, 
but junior forward Zoe Heimer, who made the shot, knew the puck had 
crossed the goal line, prompting a video review that ultimately ruled 
in favor of the Wildcats.
  The top-seeded Dodge County team has been nothing but impressive all 
season, finishing strong with a record of 24-3-2. Their championship 
win marks the first state title--not only for the program--but for any 
girls hockey team south of the Twin Cities.
  It is my honor to recognize this years Class 1A Minnesota Girls 
Hockey Champions today. Thanks to the strong leadership and 
encouragement from Coach Gunderson, and relentless support by the 
teams staff, families, classmates, and community these talented young 
women earned a state championship title. All of us across the First 
Congressional District are incredibly proud to call them our own.
  Congratulations to Coach Gunderson and the entire Wildcats family on 
an unbelievable season.
I rise today to honor and pay tribute to 
Antioch Missionary Baptist Church in Hartsville, South Carolina. The 
history of Antioch is profound and deserving of the great celebration 
that is taking place on Easter Sunday.
  The journey that has brought Antioch Church to this moment began in 
1888 when the Church was established on the crest of a hill. That year, 
a group of people with great faith in their hearts and each other, came 
together for one mission. The Churchs early founders--Shade Charles, 
Joe Coe, William Brunson, Ham Fountain, and the Reverend Jonas Muldrow 
decided to call their new church ``Antioch. These men and women were 
the first officers of the church with Reverend Jonas Muldrow as their 
first pastor.
  In 1937, the structure of the Church was replaced, and it has gone 
through several renovations since, with the most recent taking place in 
1984, when the church added two Sunday school classrooms and brick 
veneered the sanctuary.
  Since its inception, Antioch Missionary Baptist Church and its 
congregation have served as a beacon of light within the community. The 
programs and ministries initiated by the church have served as models--
for other churches of various denominations in the area. The strength 
of spirit and unbridled faith have allowed the church to blossom and 
thrive through the years. Its congregants diligently serve in several 
capacities--deacons, ministers, Sunday school teachers, missionaries, 
choir members, ushers, musicians, and so much more. Churches like 
Antioch are significant parts of our history and their stories are 
anchors in the African American faith community.
, it is my great honor to pay tribute to this fine 
congregation for its dedication, endless faith, and the love it has 
shown to the community. As we learn from Acts 11:26, Barnabas found 
Paul in Tarsus and brought him to Antioch where they spent a whole year 
assembling themselves with the church, and teaching and it was there 
that the disciples were first called Christians.
  I ask you and my colleagues to join me in congratulating Antioch 
Missionary Baptist Church and wishing its congregation Gods blessings 
in the days ahead.