it gives me great pleasure today to rise and 
recognize the Boyle County Rebels, a football powerhouse, in the 1st 
Congressional District of Kentucky upon their recent winning of the 
state championship.
  I am honored to recognize the Boyle County Rebels on their fourth 
consecutive state championship. The hours of hard work that this team 
puts in both on and off the field does not go unnoticed as they ended 
their undefeated season as champions.
  I want to congratulate all the players, staff, faculty, and the 
entire community of Boyle County on this great achievement. This 
football program has had historic success, and I have no doubt they 
will continue their winning traditions in the future.
  I join with the community of Boyle County in celebrating the Rebels 
football team in their fourth consecutive 4A state championship.
I rise today to recognize the 
swearing-in of Jill Dutton as State Representative for Texas 2nd House 
District. Mrs. Dutton is a strong conservative, entrepreneur, and 
devoted to the people of Van Zandt County. I am confident she will be a 
determined and effective representative for her constituents.
She is a former school 
board member with Van ISD where she fought for parents and students. 
When a tornado struck her town, she worked to rebuild the schools and 
develop a new Career &amp; Technology Center that now prepares students for 
careers after graduation. She has dedicated herself to serving the 
people of Van Zandt County and I look forward to what she will 
accomplish for the people of Texas.
  I am proud to represent Van Zandt County and am confident that she 
will diligently serve them in the Texas Legislature. I wish her and her 
family the very best as she begins her term.
I rise today to honor the 
selfless service and incredible accomplishments of Dr. Sandra Ortega, a 
United States Air Force Veteran and retired Chief Master Sergeant. She 
was the first African-American woman to join the Air Force in 1958.
  Under the direct commission of President Dwight D. Eisenhower, Dr. 
Ortega dedicated her military career and life after serving to 
improving the lives of countless military families and communities. It 
was in the Air Force where she challenged and broke down racial and 
gender stereotypes and barriers. During her service, Dr. Ortega worked 
as the Chief of Social Actions where she implemented programs to help 
servicemembers and their families remain as constructive members of 
their military community and educate them on drug and alcohol addiction 
prevention. Her service has had ripple effects across New Jersey and 
the Nation.
  Not only did Dr. Ortega dedicate her life to serving our country, she 
has worked to improve the lives of communities around the world. She 
worked to improve education and health infrastructures across Africa, 
rebuild and stabilize communities in the former Soviet Union after its 
dissolution, and other emergency management and relief efforts in 
disaster-stricken communities.
  Dr. Ortega earned a Masters in Counseling Psychology from Ball State 
University, an Honorary Doctorate of Laws from Morgan State University, 
and a Ph.D. in Sociology from La Salle University. Today, she spreads 
her love for, and the importance of, education through her role as an 
Adjunct Professor at the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New 
Jersey.
  The scope of Dr. Ortegas work has touched so many lives, including 
some in my home of Burlington County. A resident of Marlton, she has 
been elected three times as the Democratic Committeewoman representing 
Evesham Township, New Jersey in the Burlington County Democratic 
Committee.
  Dr. Ortega not only excelled at serving her country and community, 
but she is a loving wife, mother, and grandmother. She was married to 
her late husband, Julio Ortega, for over 60 years and has four 
daughters and nine grandchildren.
  While many community members locally know Dr. Sandra Ortega and her 
positive impact in our community, today Im proud to honor her tenure 
as a public servant and veteran of the United States Air Force. We are 
lucky to have her inspiration in our community.
HONORING MSU MENS BASKETBALL COACH TOM IZZO FOR HIS 700 WINS
today I pay tribute to a legendary member 
of the Michigan State University community: head coach of the mens 
basketball team, Tom Izzo. Now in his

29th year as head coach and his 41st overall year with the team, Coach 
Izzo recently added another accomplishment to his already impressive 
resume with his 700th career win, all of them with the Spartans. It was 
quite a present for Izzo to reach this milestone on his 69th birthday, 
however his dedication to the Spartans, to the MSU community, and to 
his home state of Michigan is the gift he continues to offer to us all.
  Growing up in Iron Mountain in Michigans Upper Peninsula, young Tom 
Izzo dominated his high school football, track, and basketball teams. 
He didnt know it at the time, but his decision to focus on basketball 
at Northern Michigan University not only changed his life, but changed 
the course of the history of the sport. A tireless worker from the very 
beginning, its no surprise that Tom Izzo went on to be named an All-
American and established the Wildcat record for most minutes played in 
a season.
  Northern Michigan University is also where Izzo began his collegiate 
coaching journey, serving as an assistant until a position opened up at 
Michigan State University. There, he worked under legendary coach Jud 
Heathcoate until his retirement, and in 1994 was officially named head 
coach of the Spartans.
  His incredible statistics could fill volumes: Izzo led his team to 
the 2000 NCAA National Championship, 10 regular-season Big Ten 
Championships, six Big Ten Tournament titles, eight Final Four 
appearances, eight National Coach of the Year awards and a Big Ten-
record 25 straight NCAA Tournament appearances. When the Spartans were 
selected for the 2023 NCAA Tournament, Izzo became the first mens 
basketball head coach in history to lead his team to 25 consecutive 
appearances. He is MSUs all-time winningest coach, with his 
accomplishments enshrined in both the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall 
of Fame and the Michigan Sports Hall of Fame. And now, he joins an 
elite group of fewer than 40 Division 1 coaches to achieve 700 career 
wins.
  So beloved by students is Tom Izzo that students must camp out to 
join the highly coveted ``Izzone section of the Breslin Center, 
resulting in a sea of green and white tents and a 24-hour revival-style 
demonstration of support and love for the sections namesake. And when 
tragedy struck campus one year ago and a gunman claimed the lives of 
three students and injured several others, it was Izzos voice the 
community turned to in the hours and days after the shooting. At a 
campus-wide vigil, he encouraged each and every Spartan to confront 
fear and to stand together. ``We need each other, he told us. ``For 
40 years Ive always believed that at Michigan State, we are at our own 
strongest when we are together.
  That night, Tom Izzo described himself as ``just a basketball 
coach. But he is so much more. A true leader and teacher, Coach Tom 
Izzo has brought so much more than hundreds of basketball wins to 
Michigan State University; he has brought stability, unity, and 
healing. Tom Izzo personifies the characteristics of the ancient 
Spartans, who were known for being prepared, methodical, jovial, loyal, 
and courageous. His heart beats to the tune of ``Victory for MSU and 
his blood runs pure Green and White. With abiding gratitude, it is my 
honor to recognize his service here, in the United States House of 
Representatives.
I am proud to honor a bright young man from 
Ohios 15th Congressional District.
  Nathaniel Palaia, who attends South-Western Career Academy, was 
recently named a 2024 nominee for the U.S. Department of Education 
Presidential Scholars Program.
  This is one of the highest honors in the nation for a high school 
student. Nathaniel is a dedicated student in the Career Technical 
Education field and serves as a member of Ohio State Universitys Eco-
Car Electric Vehicle Challenge Team.
  He also serves as student council president, president of the 
Engineering and Robotics Program, team captain of the Autonomous 
Vehicle Challenge, and has founded a peer mentoring program.
  Nathaniel is also a member of the National Technical Honor Society 
and has played varsity football for Grove City High School. He spends 
his summers volunteering with children with special needs.
  He manages to excel at all of these things while earning above a 4.0 
GPA and challenging himself in new ways academically.
  Nathaniel represents the true Buckeye spirit of Ohio. Among his many 
accomplishments, it has been made clear that he is also a caring, 
compassionate, and intelligent individual.
  He works hard for what he wants, and I have no doubt this will carry 
him far in his future career and in life.
  I am proud to represent a congressional district where students like 
Nathaniel give their time and abilities to make it a better place for 
everyone. It is with great pride that I honor Nathaniel in this great 
recognition.
I rise today to honor an incredible 
milestone reached by Raymond Tremblay of Vernon, Connecticut, who turns 
100 years old on February 14, 2024. Raymond is the epitome of a 
patriotic, service-oriented American and continues to live a full life.
  Born on February 14, 1924, to Yvonne and Emile Tremblay in Berlin, 
New Hampshire, Raymond has been a devoted American, dedicating his life 
and work to bettering our country.
  Raymonds life trajectory changed with our Nations entry into the 
Second World War following the attack on Pearl Harbor. In 1943, he 
heeded the call of his Nation to serve the United States in World War 
II. Raymond was drafted into the Infantry and sent to train in North 
Carolina. There he spent time honing his skills, preparing to be 
deployed at a moments notice. The Army Air Force, during a visit to 
the base for recruitment of new airmen and engineers, recognized 
Raymonds talent and commitment to the war effort and immediately 
approved his transfer to that branch of the service.
  Now newly baptized as an airman, Raymond traveled to Texas to train 
as a flight engineer on a B-17 aircraft. His attention to detail and 
devotion to his obligations led to a promotion to the rank of Sergeant. 
Although never sent to fight in the European or Pacific theaters, 
Raymond was always ready to go wherever he was needed, a symbol of his 
devotion to his country.
  After his service in the Air Force, Raymond used his newly acquired 
aviation knowledge to contribute to a leading company in the aerospace 
industry. After the war concluded and he was discharged, Raymond 
returned home to Connecticut and found employment within the 
experimental and testing division at Pratt and Whitney where he could 
continue to support its mission with his skills and passion for working 
with aircraft. Pratt and Whitney Aircraft was instrumental in 
developing jet engines in the Cold War era that made a decisive 
difference in protecting our allies and the U.S. homeland. Until his 
retirement in 1982, Raymond was a part of that effort which our Nation 
should never forget.
  During this time at Pratt and Whitney, Raymond also married his 
hometown sweetheart and the love of his life, Lillian. Together they 
moved to Vernon, Connecticut in 1957. In Vernon, Raymond fulfilled his 
life-long dream of settling down and owning his own home, a place he 
and his wife raised their family in and lived for over 60 years.
, I ask that my colleagues please join me in wishing 
Raymond a happy 100th birthday and recognizing him as the outstanding 
citizen he has distinguished himself as. I consider myself fortunate to 
represent constituents of such quality as Raymond. It is my honor to 
cement the incredible and continuing story of Raymond Tremblay. We wish 
Raymond a joyous birthday and many more years of happiness.
I rise today to honor the memory of John 
Morrow Derby, a legend of Central Valley journalism who spent 60 years 
in the newspaper business.
, 
including the Merced County Times, the Atwater-Winton Times, the Hilmar 
Times, the Hughson Chronicle, and the Waterford News. He also served as 
president of the parent company Mid-Valley Publications.
, 
``The Power of Positive Press. He was an avid sailor, a member of the 
Lake Yosemite Sailing Association, and a longtime member of the Merced 
Sunrise Rotary Club.
  John Derby first came to the Central Valley in the 1950s, studying at 
Fresno State and serving in the military toward the end of the Korean 
conflict. In Korea, he picked up the journalism bug when he pursued an 
assignment to write about the operations of nine battalions from Seoul 
to Panmunjom where the peace talks were held.
1961 after landing a 
reporting job at the Sun-Star. Over the course of six decades, he 
started multiple newspapers across the Central Valley. Mr. Derby once 
wrote, ``Life without being a newspaper man is about the most boring 
thing in the world. The ink really is in my blood . . . I am here to 
stay and do what I have loved to do all my life--and that is to cover 
the lives of people in our community in a positive way.
  Last Christmas, he wrote a deeply personal message to some of his top 
staffers: ``You are full grown, and capable newspaper people. You have 
learned all the lessons it took me 60 years to learn and more. Now it 
is your duty to teach others the art of good honest journalism . . . 
May your ship of life sail true. May the ocean be wide and the currents 
be strong. May the winds blow hard. May you sail on, through the fury 
of those winds, and come out whole.
  Throughout his six-decade career in journalism, John Morrow Derby 
exemplified ``The Power of Positive Press with his devotion to his 
community and his steadfast dedication to fairness, decency, and truth.
  It was an honor to have known him, and upon his passing, I would like 
to extend my sincere condolences to his family and express my deepest 
sympathies to his beloved Mid-Valley Publications team.
I rise today to make clear why I 
voted in opposition to H.R. 3202--The Assad Regime Anti-Normalization 
Act of 2023. By way of background, I have in my district the family of 
journalist Austin Tice, a former Marine Corps Captain who was captured 
in Syria in 2012. Since that time this family has been working with me, 
other members of Congress, multiple presidential administrations, and 
the Assad regime to secure the release of their son from captivity. Mr. 
Tice was abducted in Syria by an unknown group while reporting on the 
conflict as a freelance journalist. While the Assad regime has not 
claimed responsibility, the State Department has indicated that they 
believe Tice is being held by the regime or its allies.
  My opposition to this legislation stems from the appeal of Austins 
family. It is their understanding that saving the life of their son 
requires engagement with the Assad regime, exactly the kind of 
engagement that this legislation would prohibit. Let me be absolutely 
clear, Bashar al-Assad is an illegitimate war criminal who has 
brutalized the citizens of Syria and caused immeasurable harm. I 
believe our Nation should take all reasonable steps to stymie the goals 
of this regime, saving steps that will harm captives like Marine Corps 
Captain Austin Tice and other U.S. nationals held in Syria.
I rise today to congratulate outgoing 
Minnesota Soybean Growers Association (MSGA) President Bob Worth.
  Bob has served more than two decades with the Minnesota Soybean 
Growers Association in various roles: beginning as a volunteer, 
treasurer, secretary and lastly as president. MSGA is our nations 
longest-running state soybean association, and Bob is the only 
Minnesota farmer to have served multiple, two-year terms as president. 
Bob also has worked on his fathers corn and soybean farm in southwest 
Minnesota for more than 50 years with his wife Gail, their son Jon and 
Jons family.
  Im thankful for our strong working relationship during his time with 
MSGA. During his tenure, Bob has become a national spokesperson for 
rural mental health awareness; in this role, hes bravely shared his 
story and encouraged his fellow rural residents to rally around each 
other. Bob is also a strong advocate and leader in expanding and 
protecting renewable biofuels. Thanks to the hard work from leaders 
like Bob, Minnesota became the first state to require biodiesel in our 
diesel fuel blends when Bob first served as MSGA president.
  In Congress, I am proud to be a co-chair of the bipartisan House 
Biofuels Caucus and a strong advocate for renewable biofuels. In 
particular, I have urged the FDA to consider how biofuels can address 
climate change and improve emissions factors. Homegrown biofuels are 
tools we have at our fingertips right now to help address climate 
change, thanks to leaders like Bob.
  Im grateful for our partnership, and I wish Bob and his family the 
best in his next chapter.
today I would like to 
recognize Timothy Arnade for his distinguished career and significant 
contributions and accomplishments at the Federal Highway Administration 
(FHWA).
  After 41 years of federal service, including 29 years with FHWA, Mr. 
Arnade retired from FHWA on December 31, 2023. A dedicated public 
servant, Mr. Arnade began his career serving in the Peace Corps. 
Throughout his time with FHWA, Mr. Arnade served with distinction and 
operated at a consistently exceptional level. From July 7, 2008, 
through his retirement, Mr. Arnade served as Team Leader for 
Congressional Affairs in FHWAs Office of Policy and Governmental 
Affairs.
  In this capacity, Mr. Arnade led a team that responded to all 
Congressional requests that came to FHWA. This included thousands of 
requests for technical assistance on individual pieces of legislation, 
spanning numerous committees and both authorization and appropriations 
law. Mr. Arnade also played a pivotal role in numerous Federal-aid 
Highway Program reauthorizations, including the Moving Ahead for 
Progress in the 21st Century (MAP-21); the Fixing Americas Surface 
Transportation Act (FAST Act); and most recently, the transformational 
Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act (known as the Bipartisan 
Infrastructure Law).
a national expert in the areas of transportation 
safety, infrastructure, innovation, and accountability. All those who 
interacted with Mr. Arnade--Congressional and Committee staff, state 
and local governmental officials, FHWA and U.S. Department of 
Transportation leadership, and his peers in other modal 
administrations--readily acknowledge his dedication to the safety and 
improvement of our nations infrastructure and the American people who 
use it. He brought a remarkable ability to communicate in a clear, 
effective, and timely manner with Member offices and Congressional 
Committees on complex transportation issues. This ability served him 
particularly well in times of infrastructure emergencies when 
responsiveness and communication are most critical.

  Providing quality customer service is an inherent part of the 
responsibilities of any congressional and intergovernmental affairs 
specialist. Mr. Arnades superior work ethic and professional drive to 
deliver high-quality, on-time service to Congress and others was 
exemplary among his peers. Mr. Arnade is well known among his 
colleagues for his availability, responsiveness and dedication, 
routinely working beyond traditional work hours to respond to 
Congressional inquiries. These efforts contributed to the development 
of high-quality legislative solutions and reinforced FHWAs reputation 
for providing exceptional technical assistance to Capitol Hill.
Over 
the years, the House Transportation and Infrastructure Committee, other 
congressional committees, Members of Congress, and their staff have 
relied on Mr. Arnades legislative and highway policy expertise, quick 
and helpful responses, and cheerful demeanor. Mr. Arnades colleagues 
at USDOT and FHWA depended on his tireless efforts and his never-wilted 
spirit. Mr. Arnade will be missed at FHWA. However, his legacy will 
live on in the customers he served, the staff he mentored and trained, 
and the colleagues he influenced.
  On behalf of the Committee, my colleagues, and our staff, I thank Mr. 
Arnade for his steadfast public service and his support for Congress 
and extend our well wishes to Mr. Arnade on his retirement.