I rise to recognize the Jenny Lin 
Foundation, which provides music education and public safety programs, 
on the occasion of its 30th anniversary, which our community will 
commemorate this month.
  The Jenny Lin Foundation was created in 1994 in response to the 
tragic murder of its namesake, a 14-year-old Castro Valley resident, in 
her own home after returning from school. Jenny was a straight-A 
student passionate about music and friendship.
  To keep Jennys memory alive, her parents, Mei-Lian and John Lin, 
established the nonprofit in Castro Valley to their daughters name. 
The Foundation provides student music scholarships, public safety 
community events, and an annual summer music program.
  The hallmark summer music program is free of charge to students in 
the Bay Area and offers programs for orchestra, band, and choir. After 
the five-week program, participants perform in large concerts for the 
community to enjoy.
  In 2023, over 200 students from 29 schools across 12 Bay Area cities 
participated in the program cosponsored by Chabot Community College.
  The Jenny Lin Foundation also hosts safety fairs and workshops to 
inform our communities about child safety precautions for parents and 
children. One specific advocacy effort was the Foundations work to 
increase the number of books covering safety themes available at East 
Bay public libraries. In 2023, the Jenny Lin Foundation received the 
Jefferson Award for Public Service. This is the most prestigious public 
service award in the United States and was well-deserved.
  I join the community in continuing to mourn the tragic loss of Jenny 
30 years ago and admire Mei-Tian and Johns resilience demonstrated 
through their community engagement and advocacy after such a tragic 
loss. May their efforts continue to uplift and support the community 
and keep the memory of Jenny alive in our hearts.
I rise today to commend the brave 
firefighters from across St. Clair County.
  On Sunday, a dangerous fire broke out at an industrial warehouse in 
Port Huron. Local Fire Departments rushed to the scene and were met 
with an incredibly complex and nasty fire deep within the metal 
warehouse.
  But this fire wasnt fought alone, as there was a community-wide 
response from local departments to assist in extinguishing this fire. 
Firefighters from Port Huron were joined by those from Fort Gratiot, 
Kimball Township, Marysville, St. Clair, and St. Clair County Homeland 
Security. When one firefighter had given his all, the next man stepped 
up and continued the effort to fight this fire.
  Thanks to the quick and decisive actions of our local fire 
departments, this dangerous fire was successfully extinguished without 
any casualties after a multi-day battle.
  Michigans 9th District is incredibly thankful for the cohesive 
effort by local fire departments to fight this fire and protect our 
community.
I rise today to honor my constituent, 
Andre Jones, in recognition of BIPOC Mental Health Awareness Month. 
Andres life and creativity are an invitation to celebrate the beauty 
of our shared humanity.
  Andre, a Chicago native from the Logan Square area in the IL-03, has 
published a unique coloring book. It is called ``Colorful Memoirs: A 
Journey Through Andres Life, which offers a glimpse into his 
experiences and affirms his credo: ``Just like you, I am a human 
being.
  Andie participates in the community living programs at Envision 
Unlimited, where he practices his commitment to inclusion and 
community-building through his leadership of the cycling committee. 
There, he met Treena Glover, Envision Unlimiteds residential housing 
manager. Treena, who passionately nurtures the residents unique 
interests and talents, served as Andres motivator and helped co-author 
Andres coloring book.
  Andre is donating the proceeds from the coloring book to support his 
beloved summer cycling programs. On behalf of Illinois Third 
Congressional District, I commend Andre Jones for his contributions to 
mental health awareness and his ongoing efforts to equip and uplift our 
community.
I rise today to celebrate the career of 
Gallipolis native and Civilian Aide to the Secretary of the Army, Steve 
Lee. Steve truly understands what service to our nation means.
  Steve has never forgotten about our nations veterans. In 2004, Steve 
helped found one of the USOs largest annual events: Cincinnatis 
Tribute to the Troops, which has raised millions of dollars to help 
support the important work USOs do for our veterans.
  As a Civilian Aide to the Secretary of the Army, Steve played a 
critical role in connecting local communities with the Army. Through 
meeting with local community members, liaisons help communicate the 
concerns of the public with the Secretary of the Army. Liaisons like 
Steve also play an important role in recruitment and retention, as he 
served as the face of the Army to the local community.
  As a veteran myself, I have seen firsthand the impact Steve has had 
on our community and I want to thank him for his tireless commitment to 
the over 40,000 veterans who reside in southern Ohio.
I rise today to introduce the Corner Post 
Reversal Act of 2024 with my good friend, Mr. Nadler, Ranking Member of 
the Judiciary Committee. This crucial piece of legislation restores 
longstanding judicial precedent that provided certainty to small 
businesses and everyday Americans by ensuring finality of agency rules.
  The Supreme Courts decision in Corner Post v. Board of Governors of 
the Federal Reserve System abandons the accepted interpretation of the 
statute of limitations found in the Administrative Procedure Act (APA), 
which required challenges to rules to be brought within the first six 
years after the promulgation of the final rule. Instead, the Court 
turned the meaning of the language inside out to empower entities to 
challenge federal agency rules within six years of the entity accruing 
harm, effectively subjecting all federal rules to continual challenge.
  The Corner Post ruling undermines clear Congressional intent to 
restrict challenges to six years and introduces unprecedented 
uncertainty. Under this ruling, new entities can be continually created 
specifically to challenge established rules undermining critical 
stability. Even long-standing rules that businesses, states, and 
communities have incorporated into their planning may be upended at any 
point. Consumers and small businesses rely on clear and consistent 
rules, and they cannot afford to continually adjust to accommodate 
constant change. The Court now opened the flood gates for endless, 
costly legal challenges. Our court system will likely be overburdened 
as companies attack agency regulations.
  The Corner Post Reversal Act of 2024 would protect well-developed and 
scientifically based agency actions from attacks, by giving finality to 
rules, thereby ensuring that common sense protections for consumers, 
hardworking Americans, healthcare, food safety, and our environment 
remain in place after the six-year challenge period.
  Stability is important to the American economy. Consumers and small 
businesses rely on consistent rules developed by experts to protect 
them and do not want to keep adjusting to the roller coaster the Court 
just put them on. We are introducing this legislation to make

sure that Americans and our court system are not overburdened by an 
ever-changing regulatory framework.
  I ask my colleagues to join Mr. Nadler and me in supporting this 
crucial legislation.
Madam Speaker, I rise today in honor of the incredible 
accomplishments of female athletes--and against the unfair and unjust 
regulations from the Biden Administration.
  On the eve of the Olympics, the Biden Administration announced new 
rules to gut Title IX that would wipe away decades of progress and 
nearly eliminate any chance of a level playing field for female 
athletes.
  When I was growing up, along with many in this chamber, I watched my 
schoolmates fight tooth and nail for every victory. The lady Bulldogs 
were just as tough as their male counterparts, but it wasnt until 
Title IX that their right to equal access to athletics and scholarships 
was achieved. Even then, the uphill battle for quality fields, 
equipment and coaches was a fight. But those trailblazers made it 
possible for girls today to participate, develop, and excel as student 
athletes.
  Many of my colleagues have mentioned the physical dangers of men 
competing against women, and there are many. Theres also the basic 
understanding of biology. Boys are boys, and girls are girls. Boys run 
faster, jump higher, and hit harder.
  But Id like to focus on the opportunity cost. We all hear about 
elite female athletes being stripped of their titles by men who 
couldnt cut it in their own league. How about the hundreds of young 
ladies we dont hear about who missed out on high school playoffs, 
scholarships, state records, and other accolades all to bow to the 
radical left agenda?
  Madam Speaker, I will not allow opportunities that were hard fought 
by women for decades to be stolen for girls today. I stand in strong 
support of the resolution and against President Bidens radical Title 
IX rule.
I rise today to congratulate my constituent, 
Prince William County, Virginia resident, United States Marine Master 
Gunnery Sergeant (Ret.) and proud World War II and Korean War Veteran 
Carroll Braxton on the occasion of his 100th Birthday, and to thank him 
for his years of dedicated service.
  MGySgt (Ret.) Carroll Braxton was born on July 14, 1924 in Manassas, 
Virginia. Shortly after President Roosevelt cleared the path for 
citizens ``regardless of color, race, creed or national origin. to 
enlist, Mr. Braxton, along with several of his high school classmates, 
enlisted in the United States Marine Corps in 1943. Completing Boot 
Camp at the segregated, Monford Point Base in North Carolina, Mr. 
Braxton earned his Eagle, Globe, and Anchor, stating that ``We were 
`the chosen few, and as an experimental group, we had to prove we 
could make it.``
  After graduating from Boot Camp, he served as a Marine Drill 
Instructor until his deployment overseas with the Fifth Replacement 
Depot Company. Mr. Braxton and his unit island-hopped through the 
Saipan, Peleliu, and Okinawa campaigns in 1945 where he earned the rank 
of Sergeant. In 1946, Carroll left the Active-Duty Marine Corps and 
joined the Marine Reserves, only to be called back to active duty at 
Camp Lejeune during the Korean War.
  After the war, Mr. Braxton returned home to Manassas and married his 
wife Celestine and welcomed two children Monique and Robert. Mr. 
Braxton retired from the United States Marine Corps in 1979, as a 
Master Gunnery Sergeant after 33 years of distinguished and dedicated 
military service. Though retired, Mr. Braxton continued his dedication 
and service to his country working as a procurement analyst at the 
Cameron Station Army Base in Alexandria. Living the values of the 
Marine Corps, Mr. Braxton also served his community, serving as a 
Deacon and Board of Trustees Chair at the First Baptist Church of 
Manassas, and establishing the local American Legion Post. In 2012, 
President Obama awarded Mr. Braxton and the Monford Point Marines the 
Congressional Gold Medal. In 2020, Prince William County renamed one of 
its schools, Unity Braxton Middle School, in honor of Celestine and 
Carroll and their incredible years of service.
, I ask that you and our colleagues join me today in 
congratulating Master

Gunnery Sergeant (Ret.) Carroll Braxton on the occasion of his 100th 
birthday, and for his outstanding service and sacrifice, on behalf of a 
grateful Nation.
I rise today to recognize Mr. Ronald Raper 
on Atomic Veterans Day and thank him for his service to our Nation. Mr. 
Raper was born on May 31, 1938, in Boulder, Colorado. At the age of 18, 
In 1958, Mr. Raper was a 
part of Operation Hardtack I, where he was a member of the flight crew 
that flew into radioactive fallout to conduct air sampling of nuclear 
tests at the Pacific Proving Grounds in the Marshall Islands. During 
this operation, Mr. Raper also contributed to Operation Newsreel, a 
high-altitude naval study conducted near Johnston Atoll. Following the 
Vietnam War in 1973, he was deployed with USS Coral Sea and played a 
crucial role in Operation End Sweep. Stationed in the Gulf of Tonkin, 
North Vietnam, he contributed significantly to the Mine Logistics 
Carrier Stations, where he helped in the removal of naval mines in the 
waterways of North Vietnam. To recognize his dedication and leadership 
during this operation, Mr. Rapers Navy Commander awarded him with a 
citation for outstanding performance of duty. During his military 
career, Mr. Raper was stationed throughout the United States and around 
the world, having served in California, Tennessee, Oklahoma, and Japan. 
This past year, Mr. Raper was awarded the Atomic Veteran Certificate 
and Atomic Veteran Service Commemorative Medal from the United States 
Department of Defense, to honor his service in Operation Hardtack I. 
This recognition is a testament to Mr. Rapers lifelong career of 
service and sacrifice in advancing our Nations atomic and nuclear 
weapons program. In addition to this honor, Mr. Raper has received 
other distinguished awards throughout his career, including the Navy 
Good Conduct Medal, which he was awarded four times, and the National 
Defense Service Medal. In 1975, Mr. Raper retired from the Navy after 
serving 20 honorable years. Mr. Speaker, I ask all my colleagues in the 
House of Representatives to join me in honoring the incredible life of
I rise today with abundant joy and eternal 
gratitude in recognition of the 130th anniversary of Goodwill of 
Western Missouri and Eastern Kansas, affectionately referred to by 
their beneficiaries as MoKan Goodwill. This year marks over a century 
of the organizations commitment to empowering people and strengthening 
communities by providing much-needed jobs, affordable household goods, 
and employment training services to Greater Kansas Citys most 
vulnerable residents. I fully expect MoKan Goodwill to continue to 
faithfully provide their services for as long as there are Missourians 
and Kansans to accept them, and I ask that we take a moment to reflect 
on the organizations profound impact.

  The history of MoKan Goodwill is the history of two separate but 
like-minded organizations, eventually converging to make possible the 
charitable institution we know today. The first, founded 130 years ago 
in 1894, was Kansas Citys Helping Hand Institute. Formed as a relief 
organization for the citys unhoused population, the institute supplied 
food and shelter as well as monetary compensation in exchange for 
completing work projects. This process served to successfully provide 
support, employment, and eventually self-sufficiency for those who 
needed it most. In doing so, the Helping Hand Institute not only made a 
difference in the lives of thousands of Kansas Citians, but also 
developed the city into the thriving metropolis we know today.
  The second organization Goodwill, founded in Boston by Reverend Edgar 
J. Helms in 1902, was not unique to Kansas City, but was known 
nationwide for its charitable work and pioneering philanthropy. With 
the charitable will of any good minister, Helms sought to improve the 
living conditions of impoverished immigrants. He established Goodwills 
trademark business model of collecting donated goods and selling them 
for a modest profit, which would be used to pay the workers who 
prepared the goods for sale. Helms made a habit of employing people who 
were economically disadvantaged or had disabilities, people who, at the 
time, would likely be unable to find a job elsewhere. It was a system 
with similar values and missions as the Helping Hand Institute. Both 
organizations not only provided relief to those who needed it the most, 
but also sought the opportunity for upward social mobility--the 
opportunity to make the American Dream, which seemed so elusive to so 
many, a reality.
  Goodwill first came to Kansas City in 1925, in the form of a repair 
shop at St. Peters Evangelical Church on Oak Street. It became clear 
to both Goodwill and the Helping Hand Institute that their efforts to 
raise the citys disadvantaged population into self-sufficiency would 
be more successful together. In 1978, the two merged to form the 
Helping Hand of Goodwill Industries. This name was changed to Goodwill 
of Western Missouri and Eastern Kansas in 2010 to better reflect the 
geographic scope of the organization, thus creating the MoKan Goodwill 
that we know and love today.
  Today, MoKan Goodwill remains a steadfast pillar of the community of 
Greater Kansas City. Their thrift stores continue to operate under 
Reverend Helmss initial model, creating a valuable place of employment 
while extending the opportunity to purchase low-cost household goods, 
keeping those very same products out of landfills. The organization 
also offers individualized, one-on-one employment services to help 
their clients succeed in taking the most crucial step towards becoming 
self-sufficient: finding a job. Goodwill understands the importance of 
employment; to quote their mission statement, ``Employment is more than 
a paycheck. It is independence, agency, dignity, and equality. That 
mission has evolved with the times. Through classes with Goodwills 
Artemis Institute, students can learn about new technologies commonly 
used in workplaces and can even become certified as a Manufacturing 
Associate. Programs like the Artemis Institute prove that Goodwill can 
adapt to the digital age, and any other age thereafter.
  Scripture 2 Corinthians 9:7 tells us, ``Each one must give as he has 
decided in his heart, not reluctantly or under compulsion, for God 
loves a cheerful giver. The founders of the Helping Hand Institute 
were cheerful givers. Reverend Edgar J. Helms was a cheerful giver. 
Goodwill of Western Missouri and Eastern Kansas is an organization full 
of cheerful givers. Mr. Speaker, please join me as we celebrate 130 
years of cheerful giving. The work that MoKan Goodwill has done 
empowering people and strengthening communities has been invaluable in 
building the vibrant Kansas City we know today. Congratulations to 
MoKan Goodwill on 130 years of service and many more to come.
I rise today to recognize Gregory ``GG 
Jackson, II for his outstanding leadership and service.
  GG Jackson is a proud native of Camden, South Carolina, and attended 
the University of South Carolina after graduating high school in the 
11th grade. During his freshman year at USC, he played basketball all 
while taking 18 course hours and making the Deans list. Today, he is a 
long-standing member of the Jackson Ten Center and is a small forward 
for the Memphis Grizzlies in the NBA. Mr. Jackson is a true example of 
how hard work and commitment will lead you far in life.
  During his time at USC, Mr. Jackson was named the Southeastern 
Conference (SEC) Freshman of the week in the first week of the season 
after averaging 15 points and nine rebounds in his first two games. He 
would then go on to finish the season as the Gamecocks leading scorer 
before entering the 2023 NBA draft with an average of 15.4 points per 
game and leading the Gamecocks with 25 blocks and 24 steals.
  With Jacksons dedication, he was selected by the Memphis Grizzlies, 
becoming a major asset and leader to the team. During his debut, he 
would go on to score 30 points against the Oklahoma City Thunder. 10 
days later he would score 35 points with seven three-point shots 
against the Golden State Warriors, which made him the youngest player 
in the NBA to make seven three pointers in one game. Mr. Jacksons 
achievements do not stop there, as during the regular season finale he 
would score his career-high with 44 points and 12 rebounds that would 
also set the record for the most points by a rookie in the Grizzlies 
franchise history. He now has a four-year contract with the Grizzlies. 
His story is one that demonstrates that the skys the limit and that 
with hard work, you can accomplish anything.
  On Tuesday, July 30th Gregory Jackson will be hosting a special 
community event at the Jackson Teen Center in Camden, South Carolina. 
This event is dedicated to preparing local youth for the upcoming 
school year while sharing and celebrating Jacksons remarkable journey 
that is an inspiration to kids across the area. At this event there 
will be a Jersey Raising Ceremony that will be honoring Mr. Jackson by 
raising both his college and professional jersey.
  On behalf of the 5th District of South Carolina, it is my most 
sincere pleasure to recognize GG Jackson for his outstanding leadership 
and lifelong service to our state. I wish him the best of luck 
throughout his future endeavors and am confident he will continue to 
serve and will find great success in all he does.
I rise today to recognize the loss 
of one of New Mexicos most accomplished and best-loved public 
servants, former New Mexico State Representative Jim Trujillo. He 
demonstrated what it means to answer the call to public service and 
that public service is an act of love.
  I am grateful for the love Rep. Trujillo gave to the people of his 
district and our state. His legacy now lives on in countless lives he 
touched in our beautiful state through both his important career as a 
financial professional and his broad public service in the New Mexico 
Human Services Department, six years in the New Mexico National Guard, 
and his outstanding 17 years in the New Mexico Legislature.
  I met with Rep. Trujillo numerous times when I was working on voting 
rights and tribal intergovernmental matters. He always listened with 
deep attention and gave clear direction and support. He was a man of 
his word. His tireless dedication to the people of New Mexico proved 
how much we can accomplish when we work together for our beloved 
communities.
  I carry his inspiration with me as I continue my own service in the 
beautifully diverse Third District of New Mexico.
  I offer my deepest condolences to his wife Victoria, their children, 
and the entire extended Trujillo family.
I rise to pay tribute to the incredible life 
and legacy of Phillip D. Moseley, former Staff Director of the 
Committee on Ways and Means. Phil dedicated his life to service, built 
a beautiful family, and garnered so many friends along the way. A son 
of Hawaii, Phil landed in a career in politics, serving Chairman Bill 
Archer for 23 years. He was the first Republican Staff Director for the 
Committee in decades, and the career that followed would be beyond his 
wildest dreams.
  Phil was set apart by his steadfast belief in our Committee. 
Regardless of the control of power, he revered the Committee and always 
believed in our ability to do right by the American people. After an 
illustrious career, he lived out his days devoted to his family and 
developing his hobbies in coastal Carolina. To his wife, Norah, his 
daughter Kendall, and son, Clay, as well as his cadre of grandsons, 
Phil will be remembered for all that he was, and all he gave to the 
Congress and his country. His memory and legacy lives in all of us, and 
I thank him, his family, and loved ones for the impact to the Nation.
I rise today to pay tribute to a devoted 
faith leader, pillar of the Florence and Marion county communities, and 
a dear friend. Reverend Dr. Mack Torise Hines, Jr. transitioned from 
this life on Thursday, July 4, 2024. Although he no longer walks among 
us, his spirit will forever live on in the hearts of those who had the 
privilege of knowing him.
  Born on December 2, 1946, in Florence County, South Carolina, 
Reverend Hines attended Florence County public schools and was a proud 
1965 graduate of Wilson High School. After graduating, Dr. Hines 
enrolled at Allen University, where he became involved in various 
organizations, including serving as the Student Government Association 
President and pledging the Omega Psi Phi fraternity. He graduated with 
a Bachelor of Arts degree in History in May 1969. He later furthered 
his spiritual education by earning a Bachelor of Divinity degree from 
Morris College in 1980, followed by a Doctor of Ministry degree from 
Hood Theological Seminary in 2005.
  From an early age, Reverend Hines knew that he would be a preacher. A 
spiritual journey that began at his childhood church eventually led 
Reverend Hines to his first pastorate at Fork Chapel Baptist Church in 
Dillon, South Carolina. He later served at three additional churches 
before being called to St. Paul Missionary Baptist Church in Mullins, 
South Carolina, where he would serve faithfully for 40 years. During 
his tenure, Reverend Hines led revivals that touched the hearts and 
inspired the souls of many Christians. He was also a leader in the 
South Carolina and national faith communities, serving as Past 
Secretary of the S.C. Baptist E &amp; M Convention, Assistant Secretary of 
the National Baptist Convention, and Clerk and Moderator of the Pee Dee 
Baptist Association.
  Reverend Hines legacy extends far beyond the pulpit. A staunch 
advocate for education, Reverend Hines served as an educator in 
Florence public schools for 12 years, and later co-founded Wilson 
Clergy, which awards scholarships to graduates of his beloved alma 
mater, Wilson High School. He later served as the Vice-Chairman and 
Chairman of the Board of Trustees of Morris College, one of South 
Carolinas Historically Black Colleges, where he was awarded an 
Honorary Doctor of Divinity degree for his outstanding leadership in 
South Carolina.
  Reverend Hines always ensured he lived what he preached. As a 
lifelong member of the NAACP, Reverend Hines was actively involved in 
the political and government decisions that affected his community. In 
1995, he became the first African American to represent House Seat 59 
in the South Carolina General Assembly and was later awarded the Order 
of the Palmetto, South Carolinas highest civilian honor, by Governor 
Mark Sanford in recognition of his 12 years of distinguished service to 
the people of South Carolina. Reverend Hines received various 
additional accolades and awards throughout his remarkable career, 
including having a portion of Highway 76 in Marion County named in his 
honor.
  While a shepherd of souls in his community, Reverend Hines was a 
devoted husband, father, and grandfather. He was married to the former 
Gladys Jackson of Darlington, South Carolina. This holy union produced 
three beautiful children--Mack III, Michael, and Gregory. His family is 
a testament to his unwavering compassion, devotion, and values that 
characterized his ministry and service.
, I ask that you and our colleagues join me in remembering 
the remarkable life of Reverend Dr. Mack Torise Hines, Jr. May his 
family and loved ones find comfort in the knowledge that his legacy 
will endure, and may they be granted the Lords richest blessings in 
the days ahead.
I would like to include in 
the Record the following guest essay published in The New York Times, 
which my dear friend and prominent constituent, Ralph Nader, shared 
with me.

     (By David Harel, Tamir Pardo, Talia Sasson, Ehud Barak, Aaron 
                    Ciechanover and David Grossman)

       The leaders of the U.S. Congress have invited Prime 
     Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel to address a joint 
     meeting of the Senate and the House of Representatives on 
     July 24. Normally, we Israelis would consider the invitation 
     recognition of our two nations shared values and a welcome 
     gesture from our closest friend and ally, to whom we are 
     deeply and morally indebted.
       But Congress has made a terrible mistake. Mr. Netanyahus 
     appearance in Washington will not represent the State of 
     Israel and its citizens, and it will reward his scandalous 
     and destructive conduct toward our country.
       We come from a variety of areas of Israeli society: 
     science, technology, politics, defense, law and culture. We 
     are thus in a good position to assess the overall effect of 
, and like many, we believe that he 
     is driving Israel downhill at an alarming speed, to the 
     extent that we may eventually lose the country we love.
       To date, Mr. Netanyahu has failed to come up with a plan to 
     end the war in Gaza and has been unable to gain the freedom 
     of scores of hostages. At the very least, an invitation to 
     address Congress should have been contingent upon resolving 
     these two issues and, in addition, calling for new elections 
     in Israel. Inviting Mr. Netanyahu will reward his contempt 
     for U.S. efforts to establish a peace plan, allow more aid to 
     the beleaguered people of Gaza and do a better job of sparing 
     civilians. Time and again, he has rejected President Bidens 
     plan to remove Hamas from power in Gaza through the 
     establishment of a peacekeeping force. Such a move would very 
     likely bring in its wake a far broader regional alliance, 
     including a vision to solve the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, 
     which is not only in Israels interest but also in the 
     interest of both political parties in the United States. Mr. 
     Netanyahu constitutes the main obstacle to these outcomes.
       The man who will address Congress next month has failed to 
     assume responsibility for the blunders that allowed the Hamas 
     assault, initially blaming security chiefs (then quickly 
     backtracking), and has yet to announce the establishment of a 
     direly needed state commission of inquiry headed by a Supreme 
     Court judge to look into the fiasco.
       Despite the fierce fighting in Gaza and daily casualties on 
     both sides, following Hamass terrible attacks on Oct. 7, Mr. 
     Netanyahu continues to push forward with the authoritarian 
     remaking of Israel as if nothing has changed. The Israeli 
     police force, under the command of the far-right-wing 
     security minister, Itamar Ben-Gvir, has cracked down 
     violently on demonstrators. The appointments of court judges 
     and a Supreme Court president remain on hold Central 
     scientific and cultural institutions continue to endure 
     governmental attempts at political control. Large sums of 
     money have been channeled recklessly to the ultra-Orthodox, 
     who by and large do not share the economic and security 
     burden of Israels citizens, especially by remaining exempt 
     from serving in the military. Tuesdays Supreme Court ruling 
     overturning the exemption is a step forward, although the 
     practical impact is unclear, given that Mr. Netanyahu has 
     proposed enshrining the exemption in a law.
       Above all, many Israelis are convinced that Mr. Netanyahu 
     has obstructed proposed deals with Hamas that would have led 
     to the release of the hostages in order to keep the war going 
     and thus avoid the inevitable political reckoning he will 
     face when it ends.
-Gvir and Bezalel Smotrich, the finance minister, 
     whose support Mr. Netanyahu needs to maintain his government, 
     are strongly opposed to stopping the war in Gaza, even for a 
     temporary truce They demand that the Gaza Strip be conquered 
     and filled with new settlements.
       For months now, many of us have participated in nationwide 
     demonstrations demanding an immediate release of the 
     hostages, an end to the war and immediate elections. Polls of 
     Israelis show that a majority want immediate elections, or 
     elections right at the end of the war.
       A large portion of Israelis have lost faith in Mr. 
     Netanyahus government. He is clinging to power thanks to a 
     tenuous parliamentary majority. That majority ignores the 
     plight of tens of thousands of Israelis displaced in the 
     south after the Hamas attack and in the north because of 
     attacks by Hezbollah in Lebanon, and the families of the 
     hostages, a powerful force now in Israel.
       Thats where Mr. Netanyahus speech to Congress fits in 
     with his political needs No doubt it will be carefully stage-
     managed to prop up his shaky hold on power and allow him to 
     boast to his constituents about Americas so-called support 
     for his failed policies.
       His supporters in Israel will be emboldened by his 
     appearance in Congress to insist that the war continue, which 
     will further distance any deal to secure the release of the 
     hostages, including several U.S. citizens.
       Giving Mr. Netanyahu the stage in Washington will all but 
     dismiss the rage and pain of his people, as expressed in the 
     demonstrations throughout the country American lawmakers 
     should not let that happen. They should ask Mr. Netanyahu to 
     stay home.