I offer these remarks in honor of People 
Incorporated of Virginia, which celebrates its 60th anniversary this 
year. People Incorporated has been a leading advocate for the care of 
rural Virginians, particularly in Southwest Virginia, since the 
organizations inception.
  People Incorporated got its start in August 1964 in Washington 
County, providing education, day care and recreation for local 
residents. At the time, the group was referred to as the Hayters Gap 
Community Club before it was changed to the Progressive Community Club.
  Expansion of the agency ensued, with services extending to the 
Bristol area starting in 1974, when it became known as People 
Incorporated.
  The services provided by People Incorporated today help many 
communities in the Commonwealth, including the people of Buchanan, 
Dickenson, Russell and Washington Counties, as well as the City of 
Bristol. These services include community development projects, family 
and financial service counseling and employment training, among others.
  A resolution from the Virginia House of Delegates commends People 
Incorporated, noting that the group has grown to such prominence that 
it ``is regarded as one of the most innovative and successful community 
action agencies in the country.
  Given the struggles and challenges that rural Virginians face, the 
work of groups like People Incorporated makes a difference and improves 
the living conditions of many.
  I look forward to the continued success of People Incorporated, and 
thank their leadership, their staff and all affiliates for their 
tireless commitment to the betterment of our region.
I rise today to celebrate the 75th 
anniversary of the city of Fairway, Kansas.
  Founded in 1949, the city of Fairway is known as the City of Trees, 
and like mighty trees that grow from tiny seeds, so has Fairway. 
Fairway may be diminutive in size--slightly more than 4,000 people live 
within one square mile of land, but the city boasts a strong and tight-
knit community where all are welcome. This sense of community has 
sprung up in part through Fairways beautiful surroundings: the city 
was initially named for the elegant golf fairways that framed it, and 
now it is known for the towering trees that line many of its streets. 
Its no wonder that Fairway has fostered a strong local business 
community and has been home to many notable Kansans over the last 
several decades.
  I want to congratulate the city of Fairway on its 75th anniversary, 
and I look forward to what the next 75 years will bring.
I rise today to honor the Kiwanis 
Club of Brunswick for 100 years of service to Brunswick and its 
surrounding communities.
  Since 1924, the Kiwanis Club of Brunswick has been supporting youth 
literacy and development. The club has served countless children and 
communities across the world, cultivating leadership and initiating 
impactful projects that have positively affected a multitude of 
communities.
  Kiwanis was also instrumental in starting the Frank Callen Boys and 
Girls club and continues to support that organization.
  The Kiwanis Club brings a spirit of commitment and service to our 
community, and it is important that we continue to support its 
engagement and philanthropy.
  The Kiwanis Club is making Georgias First Congressional District a 
better place to live, work, and learn. Congratulations to the Kiwanis 
Club and its volunteers on 100 years of service to Georgians, and 
people worldwide.
I rise today along with my 
colleagues, Representatives Mark DeSaulnier and Eric Swalwell, to honor 
the retirement of a champion of womens issues, a leader in diversity, 
and an advocate for high quality and accessible education--Chancellor 
Carol Christ.
  Chancellor Christ began her career in academia at Douglass College, 
where she studied English Literature and graduated with high honors. 
Recognizing the value of the liberal arts and sciences, Chancellor 
Christ earned a Ph.D. from Yale University before immediately joining 
the English Department at the distinguished University of California, 
Berkeley (UC Berkeley).
  Chancellor Christ served as a professor at UC Berkeley for over three 
decades. Her titles included chair of the English Department, dean of 
Division of Humanities, and provost for the College of Letters and 
Science. Beyond helping form the minds of the future, Chancellor Christ 
was key in helping the University achieve its academic and strategic 
goals.
  This made her an ideal choice when in 2017, Chancellor Christ began 
her term as the 11th chancellor of UC Berkeley. During her term she 
oversaw academia and education at the highest level. Through thoughtful 
debate and discussion, strategic financial decisions, the consideration 
of student and community voices on key issues, and encouragement of a 
positive environment for education; Chancellor Christ helped cement UC 
Berkeley as one of the premier learning institutes in the world.
  We honor Chancellor Christ and congratulate her on a well-earned 
retirement. We thank her for her decades of service to educational 
justice and the careful facilitation of curious young minds and wish 
her well as she has more time to spend with her children and 
grandchildren as her legacy continues to grow and impact future 
generations of students and leaders.
I rise today to recognize and honor Estella 
Ybarra, from El Paso, Texas, for her exceptional dedication to justice 
and integrity.
a juror in a 1990 high-profile case of Carlos Jaile. 
When the jury convened to deliberate, she believed in Jailes innocence 
but ultimately felt intimidated by the aggressive pushes for a guilty 
verdict by her white, male peers. It was her first time serving in a 
jury and without a full understanding of the legal system, she felt 
pressured into a guilty vote, though her conscience told her otherwise.
  For almost 30 years, her conscious reminded her of the man whose 
innocence she believed in. She decided to take action and with great 
humility, courage, and empathy. She called the El Paso Police 
Department, who connected her with the District Attorneys office that 
had won Mr. Jailes conviction 27 years earlier. The office agreed to 
reexamine the case.
  The reexamination resulted in an Earth-shattering revelation: the 
District Attorneys office had DNA evidence from the FBI that 
exonerated Mr. Jaile, but hid the test results. A judge overseeing the 
re-opened case called the El Paso Police and prosecutors offices 
actions ``unacceptable and ``grossly negligent if not more.
  Estella Ybarra, serving in a capacity that demanded both diligence 
and empathy, demonstrated remarkable courage and an unwavering 
commitment to justice. The cascade of events that followed her phone 
call culminated in Carlos Jaile being released from prison after 27 
years of wrongful imprisonment. Her role in this case, as detailed in a 
recent Texas Monthly article, showcases her dedication to ensuring 
fairness and integrity within the judicial process.
Today, it is my honor to recognize Estella Ybarra. She embodies the 
best of El Paso: bravery, persistence, empathy, and a commitment to 
justice. Her actions exemplify the highest ideals of public service.
it is my privilege to honor Mr. Larry 
Straus for his 74 years of dedicated service to the United States 
Postal Service.
  A Drummond Island native, Mr. Straus has been a mail carrier of the 
USPS since 1950 and has served many Michigan communities over the past 
seven decades, including Mt. Pleasant and Kingsley. Larry has served 
the Drummond Island community since 2000 and recently just celebrated 
his 95 birthday.
, it is my privilege to honor Mr. Larry Straus for his 74 
years of dedicated service to the United States Postal Service and wish 
him an incredibly happy 95th birthday.
I rise today to mourn the loss of 
Lois Ruth Cason Wooten, who sadly passed away at the age of 95.
  Lois studied English and Library Science at the University of 
Georgia. She took her passion and expertise to work as the Head 
Librarian at Northside High School in Atlanta, Georgia.
  After her time in Atlanta, Lois and her husband Frank moved to 
Savannah, Georgia where they selflessly served the city in a myriad of 
ways.
  Lois was greatly involved in the Savannah Symphony, Savannah College 
of Art and Design, and Wesley Monumental United Methodist Church.
Wooten are survived by their beloved daughter, Anna, and 
their wonderful grandchildren. Lois will always be remembered for her 
service in the Atlanta and Savannah communities and will be greatly 
missed by her family and friends.
  I offer my sincerest condolences to the entire Wooten family. My 
thoughts and prayers are with the family and Lois friends today.
Mr Speaker, I rise today to honor our Texas-24 
Hometown Hero, Lieutenant Colonel Asa Pearson from Bedford, who is 
retiring from the United States Army after 40 years of honorable 
service. LTC Pearson began his military career in October 1983, when he 
enlisted in the Army. He completed his basic training at airborne 
school and AIT, then he was assigned to the 1st Special Operations 
Command as a Psychological Operations Specialist. LTC Pearson has been 
a steadfast pillar in our community, dedicating his time, expertise, 
and compassion to helping the knowledge and well-being of those who 
need it most. During his 40 years of service in the Army, he advanced 
from Private E1 to Sergeant First Class and earned a Bachelor of 
Science degree in Emergency Management from the University of North 
Texas.
  While working as a PSYOP subject matter expert at the John F. Kennedy 
School of Special Warfare, LTC Pearson was recommended for, and 
accepted, a Direct Commission. As a Commissioned Officer, he continued 
his professional development by attending the Bush School of Government 
to study International Affairs and by earning a masters degree from 
Texas Christian University. LTC Pearson has consistently sought 
opportunities to expand his knowledge, attending the Transportation 
Officer course, the Civil Affairs Officers Advanced Course, and the 
PSYOP Officers course. In addition, he has served in the following 
roles: PSYOP Team Sergeant in Desert Storm, Civil Affairs Joint Staff 
Officer in the Balkans, PSYOP Detachment Commander to Afghanistan, and 
Civil Affairs Company Commander in the Horn of Africa.
  LTC Pearson was awarded the Bronze Star Medal for his heroic actions 
in Desert Storm and has also received four Meritorious Service Medals, 
the Joint Service Commendation Medal, the Combat Action Badge, the 
Master Parachutist Badge, the Pathfinder Badge, and the Russian Basic 
Airborne Badge.
  Lieutenant Colonel Asa Pearson exemplifies the finest North Texas has 
to offer. As we honor him today, we do so not just with gratitude for 
his 40 years of service in the United States Army, but also with 
appreciation for his dedication to our community.
I rise today to honor the Marine Exchange 
of the San Francisco Bay Region, upon celebrating its 175th 
anniversary. Since its inception, the Marine Exchange has been at the 
forefront of technological advancement in its industry, implementing 
groundbreaking improvements to make the maritime industry safer for 
all.
  Originally founded in 1849, the Marine Exchange facilitated safe and 
efficient maritime trade during the California Gold Rush. Over the 
decades, the Marine Exchange evolved into a critical driver of 
innovation in the Bay Area, helping expand and develop the Bay Areas 
maritime industry. From installing the first electric telegraph on the 
West Coast to serving as the research and development site for the 
first vessel traffic service in the country, the Marine Exchange has 
played an essential role in supporting the Americas maritime 
infrastructure and promoting navigational and environmental safety.
  The Marine Exchanges remarkable milestone of 175 years of service 
demonstrates the organizations sincere commitment to supporting our 
countrys maritime industry and the countless Americans whose 
livelihoods depend on it. This commitment has led to tremendous 
economic impact in the Bay Area and beyond, strengthened environmental 
protections, and improved organization and communication throughout the 
region.
  On behalf of the constituents of Californias Eighth Congressional 
District, I would like to honor the Marine Exchange of the San 
Francisco Bay Region upon its 175th anniversary and extend my sincere 
gratitude for its generations of service to the United States maritime 
industry.
I rise today to recognize the 30th 
anniversary of the Mayo Performing Arts Center (MPAC) in appreciation 
of its importance to New Jerseys Eleventh Congressional District as a 
center of entertainment and arts education.
  MPAC has its origins in the Community Theater, the first first-run 
movie theater in

Morristown, which opened in the 1930s but eventually fell into 
disrepair. In 1994, the Theater reopened as a performing arts center, 
sparking a 30-year journey leading to the MPAC we know today. None of 
this would have been possible without the hard work and dedication of 
countless staff members, volunteers and philanthropists. MPAC has grown 
to offer over 200 performances a year to close to 200,000 patrons. 
Their events and educational programs not only enrich the community 
with vibrant music and culture, but have an $18 million impact on the 
local economy. MPAC is truly a cultural cornerstone and key economic 
driver for Northern New Jersey.
  MPACs programs strive to ensure the arts are an integral part of 
everyones life by making music, culture, and dance accessible to all. 
Their educational programs have grown exponentially to touch over 
40,000 children and their families each year of all ages and abilities. 
Opening the world for these students while introducing the creative 
spark and mental health benefits of the arts. I am especially thankful 
for MPACs groundbreaking Miracle Project which brings the 
communication, social and confidence building skills learned through 
performance arts education to children and young adults with autism and 
other special needs.
  Whether it is through large scale entertainment events, civic 
conversations, free community engagement initiatives, or their 
extensive educational programming, it is clear that MPAC provides a 
critical forum to immerse ourselves in the arts and open our minds to 
new cultural experiences. In this 30th anniversary year, I am grateful 
for all they have done to support New Jersey artists, our community and 
our local economy. I am excited to see their continued impact on the 
performing arts across New Jersey.
I rise today to recognize and congratulate 
``Terry L. Hartford on his retirement from ATI, a 
company with deep roots in Western Pennsylvania. Terry devoted his 
entire working life to ATI, retiring after 43 years of service. An 
esteemed and respected member of the ATI team, Terry was most recently 
the Vice President (Defense and Global Markets) for ATI. Through his 
tireless efforts to strengthen the Defense Industrial Base, Terry 
directly contributed to the defense of the United States and, more 
importantly, the men and women of our Armed Forces.
  A lifelong Yinzer, Terry graduated from Kiski Area High School, 
earned a Bachelor of Science degree in Economics from Allegheny 
College, and earned a Master of Business Administration from the 
University of Pittsburgh Katz Graduate School of Business. He is a 
member of the Allegheny College Board of Trustees and the Allegheny 
College Economics Department Board of Visitors, and he served as Vice 
Chairman of the Specialty Steel Industry of North America until his 
retirement.
  Terry began at ATI in 1981 and held multiple positions of increasing 
responsibility in marketing, quality, production planning, and general 
management, including Vice President and General Manager of ATIs Flat 
Rolled Products division. In this capacity, he played an integral role 
in the design, construction, and operation of ATIs Hot Rolled 
Processing Facility in Brackenridge, PA, a $1.3 billion-dollar facility 
that provides technologically advanced titanium and nickel products to 
the nations Industrial base and our armed forces. In 2015, Terry was 
selected as Vice President (ATI Defense) and charged with expanding 
ATIs support to all branches of the U.S. military and prime defense 
contractors. In this role, Terry promoted the importance of specialty 
materials in the platforms, propulsion systems, and armor providing the 
technical solutions our servicemembers depend on to fight and win out 
Nations wars.
  Terry is married to the former Laura Laderer of Meadville, PA. They 
met at Allegheny College and have been married for 42 years. They have 
four children--Leslie (husband Rich), Terrence ``I (wife Camille), 
Mike (wife Kate), and Colin (wife Allie). They are the proud 
grandparents of Ellis and Lawrence (Leslie and Rich), Will and Jane 
(Mike and Kate), and Benson and Emery (Colin and Allie), and they are 
anxiously awaiting two more grandchildren later this year.
  As Mr. Hartford embarks on a new chapter in life, it is my hope that 
he may recall, with a deep sense of pride and accomplishment, the 
outstanding contributions he has made to ATI, Western Pennsylvania, the 
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and the United States of America. I would 
like to send my fellow Yinzer my best wishes for continued success in 
his future endeavors and a well-earned retirement.
I rise today to honor the life of Lowell 
`Brent Sibley of Oneonta, Alabama, and include in the Record his 
obituary.

       Lowell `Brent Sibley, 70, of Oneonta, Alabama, passed away 
     on Tuesday, August 6, 2024. He was in the midst of completing 
     a multi-year project developing a retreat in South Alabama to 
     accomplish his son, Forrests, vision for his Air Force 
     Combat Control brothers. Thanks go out to all ``his guys 
     who have stood in as sons and brothers since 2015.
       As a proud Son of the South, Brent was born in Baton Rouge, 
     LA, grew up in Gulf Breeze, FL and made his home in Oneonta, 
     AL. He graduated from UWF with a BS in Marketing, where 
     shortly after, he opened his first business with Chick-Fil-A 
     and made a home for his family. He was an outstanding and 
     dedicated father and worked tirelessly to ensure he gave his 
     children a life full of love and life lessons. He has had a 
     lifelong passion for music and has shared his talent with 
     friends from Shreveport to Pensacola to Gadsden and beyond. 
     His accomplished guitar talent reflected his fierce 
     admiration for the true soul sound of the Blues. An original 
     ``Breezer, he leaves behind a legacy of close friendships 
     and of bandmates including the Skydogs who honor the Allman 
     Brothers. His annual Jam for Duane brought together 
     nationwide musical talent and fans for many years. Brent was 
     an avid hunter and woodsman and loved sharing his plethora of 
     knowledge with his children and his brothers within the 
     Special Tactics Community. For those who knew him, Roll Tide. 
     He was also a long-time official of baseball and basketball 
     games. He retired from Realty South in Oneonta, AL.
       He is preceded in death by his parents, Raiford and Betty 
     Sibley, and his son, SSgt Forrest Brent Sibley, 21st Special 
     Tactics Squadron.
       Brent leaves to cherish his memory his daughter, Jordan 
     Sibley; granddaughter, Sophia, of Pensacola; his fiancee, 
     Mona Maddox; brothers, Bryan Sibley (Sarah) and Dale Sibley; 
     along with nieces, nephews, cousins and extended family.
I would like to posthumously honor John G. 
Youker for his service to the United States in the War of 1812. Known 
to all as ``George, Mr. Youker was born to Revolutionary War Patriot 
John Youker, Sr. and Elizabeth Schall on February 3, 1789, in 
Montgomery County, New York within the Mohawk Valley Region.
a Private in the NY Militia under Captain 
Frederick Germans Company and Lt. Colonel Commandant Calvin Richs 
11th Regiment. From August 22, 1812 to February 22, 1813 he was 
stationed at Sackets Harbor, which became the center of American 
military activity during the war. The First Battle of Sackets Harbor 
began July 19, 1812. It was a major ship building location for the war 
and a highly important location to defend. Mr. Youker was discharged 3 
months before the second battle of Sackets Harbor.
  After his service, Mr. Youker and his wife, Catharine Burkdorf 
Youker, lived in Montgomery County, New York with their children. They 
later settled in Harrison, Pennsylvania in the mid-1840s before 
following their children to the Grand Traverse Area in the 1860s. Mr. 
Youker passed away in Blair Township in May of 1870 and was buried at 
Mt. Hope Cemetery, in what is now Green Lake Township, Grand Traverse 
County Michigan.
  In 1870, Veteran stones were not provided and military status was 
rarely made apparent

on a persons headstone, and I would personally like to thank the 
Northern Michigan Chapter of the Sons of the American Revolution for 
honoring John George Youker in a formal ceremony on August 3rd of this 
year. The work that they do truly honors our heritage and those that 
have valiantly served before us.
, today I offer the posthumous recognition and gratitude 
that John G. Youker deserves, and I honor him for his service to the 
United States in the War of 1812.
I rise today to recognize 
Pennsylvania State Representative Donna Oberlanders advocacy for the 
63rd District and to congratulate her on her retirement.
  For the past 16 years, Rep. Oberlander has served Clarion and 
Armstrong Counties, advanced economic opportunities and preserved 
traditional values.
  Throughout her time in public service, Donna has made a lasting 
impact on our commonwealth. Her legislation, Act 130 of 2022, permitted 
pilot driverless testing programs, which have created thousands of jobs 
and contributed billions in investments.
  Her advocacy for Act 7 of 2020 has created safer outcomes for 
medically fragile newborns by regulating milk banks.
  Outside of her numerous legislative accomplishments, Rep. Oberlander 
is a dependable leader. In the Pennsylvania State House, Donna has 
served as Chairwoman for the House Tourism and Economic and 
Recreational Development Committee, Republican Whip, Republican Policy 
Chairman, and Caucus Secretary.
  Rep. Oberlanders impressive leadership speaks volumes. She was the 
first Republican woman to serve as both Republican Whip and Policy 
Chairman.
  Donna Oberlander is an impressive woman; I am fortunate to call her 
my friend. I thank her for her service to the people of Pennsylvania 
and wish her well in retirement.