I rise today to commend the Naperville Fire 
Department as they mark 150 years of dedicated service across the 
Naperville community. With more than 200 employees, ten active fire 
stations, and six consecutive years of international accreditation, the 
department is an outstanding model of excellence in its field.
  Established in 1874 after Napervilles first purchase of firefighting 
equipment, the department has pursued its mission of responding to 
calls and promoting public education programs. Over the years, the 
Naperville Fire Department has evolved to meet the changing needs of 
the community, adopting new technologies and techniques to ensure the 
highest level of safety and protection for its residents.
  The Naperville Fire Department has played a crucial role in educating 
the public about fire safety and prevention. Through its various 
outreach programs and initiatives, the department has empowered 
residents with the knowledge and skills needed to protect themselves 
and their families in the event of a fire. This commitment to public 
education is vital and has undoubtedly saved countless lives over the 
years.
  As we celebrate the Naperville Fire Departments 150th anniversary, 
let us take a moment to recognize and appreciate the tireless efforts 
of its employees. Their dedication to the community is truly inspiring, 
and we are grateful for their unwavering commitment to keeping us safe.
  I am proud to represent such a distinguished department, and I ask my 
colleagues to join me in commending the Naperville Fire Department for 
its outstanding service and dedication to the community in their 
remarkable 150 years of service.
the American people extend 
congratulations to the Honorable Lai Ching-te on being sworn in as 
President of Taiwan on Monday, May 20, 2024. His successful 28-year 
career in politics as Vice President and Premier under President Tsai 
Ing-wen, Chairman of the Democratic Progressive Party (DPP), 1st Mayor 
of Tainan, and Member of the Legislative Yuan demonstrates his ability 
to be a strong leader for the people of Taiwan.
  Additionally, the vibrant democracy of the Republic of China (Taiwan) 
has elected Hsiao Bi-Khim as Vice President. During her four terms in 
the Legislative Yuan, she focused on agriculture and transportation in 
her district of Hualien, along with championing issues such as gender 
equality, foreign affairs, and human rights.
  My appreciation of the people of Chinese heritage is personal as I am 
the only member of Congress serving as the son of a Flying Tiger in 
World War II to liberate China. My father, First Lieutenant Hugh 
deVeaux Wilson with the U.S. Army Air Corps developed a great affection 
for the people of China.
  Lai Ching-tes presidency extends the rule of the DPP, which China 
views with skepticism, as the party promotes Taiwanese nationalism and 
identity, and supports the people of Taiwans right to decide their own 
future.
  Taiwan continues to face rising threats from China, as almost daily, 
military warplanes and vessels are sent toward them, many of which 
crossing the median line in the Taiwan Strait. Sadly, incursions into 
Taiwans air defense zone nearly doubled in 2022 and continued at a 
high pace in 2023 with 1,738 incursions. In December of 2022, 71 
Chinese aircraft flew

into Taiwanese airspace, the largest breach in history. On May 15, 
2024, Taiwans National Defense Ministry reported 45 Chinese military 
aircraft around the island, in just one day. With these growing 
tensions, the pressure on President Lai to balance security risks with 
promises of protecting the independence of Taiwan are high.
  Though the United States does not have official relations with 
Taiwan, the people of Taiwan have our unwavering support. We remain the 
islands most significant arms supplier and international backer, 
having approved over $8 billion in military aid last month in the 
National Security Supplemental Aid Package to support Taiwan and other 
key allies in the Indo-Pacific confronting Chinese aggression.
  President Lais priorities for Taiwan align with his predecessor Tsai 
Ing-wen, with plans to boost defenses, including increasing military 
budgets, improving its military force structure, and concentrating on 
economical mobile weapons systems and more vigorous civil defense. 
Domestic reform is one of his top priorities, including social spending 
for the improvement of national health insurance and redirecting 
economic policy from motives for certain industries to developing more 
service sector jobs and encouraging domestic consumption.
  Lai has retained the majority of the Tsai team, including her foreign 
minister, Joseph Wu, who now leads his National Security Council, and 
former NSC head Wellington Koo, who now is the defense minister. He 
also recruited several private-sector executives for his cabinet, 
prominently JW Kuo, chair of Topco. Along with the Lai administration, 
I look forward to working with Taiwans ambassador to the U.S., 
Ambassador Alexander Yui.
  The inauguration of President Lai Ching-te at the presidential office 
building in central Taipei featured an overwhelming amount of support 
for him, as crowds, including a show of marching bands and performers, 
gathered in a nearby plaza to show their support and listen to his 
inauguration speech. A bipartisan delegation of former senior U.S. 
officials, including former Deputy Secretary of State Richard Armitage, 
also attended the inauguration.
  Sadly, we are in a war we did not choose, between dictators with Rule 
of Gun invading democracies with Rule of Law. We must stand firm to 
protect the borders of Taiwan, Ukraine, Israel, and the United States.
  I am confident in the leadership of President Lai Ching-te as Taiwan 
continues to face adversities to keep their allies who acknowledge them 
as a sovereign nation, amidst pressure from the Chinese Communist 
Party.
  I look forward to working with President Lai Ching-te on achieving 
Peace Through Strength, advancing our shared interests, strengthening 
our longstanding informal relationship, and maintaining stability 
across the Taiwan Strait.
I rise today to recognize the members of 
the Denton County leadership delegation who are visiting Washington, 
D.C. this week. The Denton County Chambers come to visit every two 
years, and I am once again honored to host them this year.
  I value these trips as they give our local leaders an insight and 
first-hand experience of whats happening here on the Hill. Legislation 
that we work on highly affects our communities back home. I am pleased 
to offer this opportunity and welcome the members of the Denton County 
Chambers to our Nations Capitol.
  I would like to thank them for their continued collaboration with my 
office in ensuring the economic prosperity of Denton County, making 
Texas the best place to live, work, and raise a family.
  I would like to include in the Record the following names of the 
Denton County delegation:
  Lisa Carignan, Doug Carignan, Erin Carter, Lori Fickling, Nina 
Hernandez, Kelly Heslep, Cindi Howard, Jon Kixmiller, William Meredith, 
Jim Moll, Kelly Murray, Scott Murray, Claire Powell, Sally Quezada, 
Ingrid Rex, Ryan Schroer, Kristi Tucker, Elliott Tucker, Ben Utley, 
Lori Walker, Neal Walker, and Charlotte Wilcox.
I rise today to recognize Dr. Sam Hill 
and Mrs. Lillian Hill for their lifetime of service to their community.
  Throughout their lives, Dr. and Mrs. Hill have dedicated their time 
and energy to serving their community. Throughout their career in the 
field of education--Dr. Hill as the provost of Northern Virginia 
Community College and Mrs. Hill teaching students who are deaf and hard 
of hearing--they continuously provided students with guidance and 
instruction that prepared them for their next steps. Along the way, 
they have also volunteered with countless local organizations, donated 
their expertise and time as board members of various organizations, and 
have been involved with the Hylton Performing Arts Center since its 
inception. Their commitment to service is clear and worthy of 
recognition.
  Their devotion to the betterment of their community, and the selfless 
mentality they bring to their volunteer work, serves as a shining 
example that we all can strive to follow. To pay tribute to Dr. and 
, the Hylton Performing 
Arts Center honored them both at their 14th Anniversary Gala. It is my 
pleasure to congratulate Dr. and Mrs. Hill on this well-deserved 
recognition of their legacy of public service and commitment to 
education in the Commonwealth of Virginia.
, please join me in celebrating and thanking Dr. Sam Hill 
and Mrs. Lillian Hill. Their contributions to the Commonwealth of 
Virginia will continue to uplift our neighbors for generations to come 
and I look forward to celebrating their continued success.
I rise today to 
congratulate Gary Green, a long-time constituent of Palm Beach County, 
for being inducted into Californias Music Hall of Fame and Museum. Mr. 
Green, known as the ``Outlaw Folksinger created music with an 
important message.
a rallying cry for social 
change and inspired a generation of writers to utilize music as a tool 
for organizing and activism. Mr. Greens albums are a part of the 
Smithsonian Institutions Folkways Collection. His musical significance 
and impact as a musician were recognized when the late Pete Seegar 
said, ``There should be a ballad of Gary Green. In turmoil times, 
where speaking out on social issues was frowned upon, Mr. Green 
continued to press forward. He is a true trailblazer, performing music 
of inclusive and transformative lyrics, at civil rights, labor, anti-
war, and LGBTQ+ movements.
  I am honored to congratulate Mr. Green for his successful 
contributions to both the art and social movements. I am confident that 
he will continue his life path of exceptional work.
I rise today to recognize a very special 
young man, Preston Sharp, for his passion, commitment, and 
accomplishments in honoring our nations veterans.
  Preston is a resident of Shasta County, a loving son, and grandson 
with a heart of gold. His hard work and devotion to honor veterans in 
our community and our country will be felt for generations.
  On Veterans Day in 2015, when Preston was just 10 years old, he 
visited the grave of his grandfather, a Navy veteran, at a local 
Redding cemetery. He placed a flag and flowers on his grandfathers 
headstone to thank him for his sacrifice. As he looked around, he was 
troubled by the lack of flags and flowers at the gravesites of all the 
other veterans. With encouragement from his loving mother and 
grandmother, Preston used that compassion to make a positive change in 
the world. He set a goal, and in just 5 months, by doing odd jobs and 
chores, he had earned enough to purchase flags and carnations to honor 
all 500 veterans in that cemetery in Redding, California. This 
gratifying success prompted him to set another goal, to honor veterans 
in all the Redding cemeteries. He began speaking at local groups and 
organizations who enthusiastically donated to his worthy objective, 
seeing in this young boy with a passion to honor and appreciate those 
who served. Soon, Preston was honoring veterans in cemeteries all 
around our North State, throughout California, and beyond.
  Preston has organized the placement of more than one million flags 
and red carnations on veterans headstones throughout the homeland. His 
crusades have inspired citizens in communities across the United States 
to participate in similar acts of patriotism and respect for veterans 
by coming out to clean headstones, replace weathered flags and flowers, 
and say ``Thank You to those that have served our country.
  Preston does not just honor our fallen veterans. He often visits 
veterans at the local veterans home or takes them out to lunch and 
enjoys listening to their stories. His goal is clearly to honor and 
help all veterans in any way possible, as evidenced by his current 
initiative, to help prevent and spread awareness of veteran suicides, 
which has become a top priority.
  Prestons contagious ambition has spurred him to start other 
movements like the Flag and Flower Challenge to encourage everyone in 
the United States, especially youth, to honor veterans in their own 
hometowns. He also established Veterans Flags and Flowers, a non-profit 
organization with a vision to ``honor veterans across the country and 
a mission to ``honor veterans every day, not just the holiday. As a 
teen member of the Sons of the American Legion, Preston helped inspire 
the Flying Flags for Heroes program and became their national 
spokesperson.
  Preston was invited to the White House and was honored with a seat 
beside the First Lady during President Trumps inspirational State of 
the Union Address in 2018. President Trump commended 12-year-old 
Preston Sharp for ``a job well-done and praised young patriots like 
Preston who teach all of us about our civic duties as Americans.
  Preston has been recognized and is supported by nearly every local 
club, organization, school, and business in northern California. He has 
been an honored guest, speaker and advocate at countless events, 
services, and fundraisers. He has been featured on the History Channel 
and highlighted social studies curriculum such as Inspire My Kids. He 
continues to collect accolades around the country for his work such as 
being awarded the title of Legacy Keeper by the U.S. Department of 
Veterans Affairs and is allied with the Wreaths Across America program.
  Prestons goal was to honor veterans in all 50 States which sent him 
travelling across the country, meeting veterans, visiting cemeteries, 
inspiring communities, and sharing the experience of planting flags and 
flowers along the way. Despite setbacks during the COVID-I9 shutdowns, 
on Veterans Day, November 11, 2022, Preston Sharp officially met his 
goal by presenting flags and flowers in honor of veterans in all 50 of 
our U.S. states. Quite a celebrated accomplishment.
  Preston is now planning on taking his cause overseas to Normandy for 
the 80th anniversary of D-Day. He will be placing 17,000 American flags 
and red carnation flowers at every gravestone, saying each veterans 
name out loud, and thanking them for their service.
  This young man reminds us that we all have a sacred duty to honor and 
remember those who served and sacrificed for our nation, no matter how 
old we are.
I rise today to honor the life of Ken 
Axelson; a World War II veteran and cherished member of the Wanamingo 
community, who passed away on April 11th, just a week after celebrating 
his 100th birthday.
  Ken graduated from Red Wing High School in 1943, and afterwards--like 
many in the Greatest Generation--he answered the call to serve his 
country.
  As a combat medic for the U.S. Army, Ken landed on Omaha Beach on D-
Day, and was later transferred to the 101st Airborne Division. During 
the Siege of Bastogne, he and his unit were held captive by German 
forces for five months before they were liberated by U.S. troops.
  When he returned home from the war, Ken married his wife, Billie, and 
raised their six children in Wanamingo, where Ken was active in the 
community, working as a carpenter, building inspector, and 
photographer.
  When he wasnt doing what he loved--spending time outdoors--Ken was 
giving back to those around him. He served on the Wanamingo City 
Council, while also giving his time to the volunteer fire department 
and the Wanamingo VFW.
  Ken was a true embodiment of who we are in southern Minnesota. He 
served his country, put his family first, and was never too busy to 
lend a hand to a fellow neighbor.
  He leaves behind a legacy that will long be remembered. May he rest 
in peace.
today, I introduce the Household Goods 
Shipping Consumer Protection Act. This bill would give the Federal 
Motor Carrier Safety Administration (FMCSA) more authority to protect 
consumers from fraud in the interstate transportation of household 
goods. Specifically, this bill would give FMCSA the authority to assess 
civil penalties against unregistered shippers and against entities that 
hold consumers personal goods hostage, give FMCSA the express 
authority to reimburse states for enforcing federal consumer protection 
laws related to the transportation of household goods and establish 
requirements to ensure that motor carriers, brokers and freight 
forwarders that seek registration are operating legitimate businesses. 
Representative Mike Ezell is co-leading this bill with me.
  FMCSA receives thousands of complaints every year from Americans who 
are the victims of fraud in the shipment of household goods. Fraudsters 
have launched moving companies with fake 5-star online reviews to draw 
in customers, intending to overcharge customers or to hold their 
personal goods hostage until an additional fee is paid. After receiving 
negative reviews, fraudsters open a new moving company under a new name 
and a new FMCSA license. FMCSA lacks the authority to prevent and 
punish these types of fraud.
  In 2019, a Department of Transportation Administrative Law Judge 
(ALJ) ruled that FMCSA lacks authority to assess civil penalties for 
violations of commercial regulations and registration requirements, 
including unauthorized brokerage and for failure to return household 
goods to consumers. Under current law, as interpreted by the ALJs 
decision and final agency order, FMCSA may not assess civil penalties 
for violations of commercial regulations. Instead, the Department of 
Justice must initiate an action in federal court. This bill would 
reverse the ALJs decision and provide explicit authority for FMCSA to 
adjudicate and assess civil penalties for unfair business practices and 
consumer protection violations, as well as give FMCSA authority to 
enforce roadway safety regulations against fraudsters.
  This bill would also provide explicit authority to FMCSA to withhold 
registration from any applicant that fails to provide a valid principal 
place of business or disclose common ownership with any other 
registered entities at the time of registration. Household goods 
carriers, brokers and freight forwarders have registered

with addresses where no legitimate operations take place, often 
designating their official address as a retail package store, vacant 
parking lot or business address unrelated to the registered entity. 
FMCSA already requires motor carriers to designate a principal place of 
business and disclose common ownership. However, FMCSA may only take 
enforcement action after the entity is already registered and refuses 
to cooperate with investigations at the designated address.
  This bill would also permit states to use Motor Carrier Safety 
Assistance Program and High Priority program funding to conduct 
commercial regulatory and consumer protection standard reviews and 
enforcement actions against household goods motor carriers, brokers and 
freight forwarders. It would also clarify that states may retain the 
penalties and fines imposed in proceedings relating to violations of 
household goods statutes and regulations. These provisions would 
support states in their efforts to protect the American people from 
predatory practices.
  I urge my colleagues to support this bill.
I had to miss yesterdays vote due to 
being stuck in traffic. During that time, I was unable to make Roll 
Call vote No. 219. Had I been present, I would have voted in the 
following manner: YEA on Roll Call No. 219, On Motion to Suspend the 
Rules and Pass, as Amended, the Federal Disaster Tax Relief Act.
today I want to recognize Bernie Ricke, 
former president of UAW Local 600, based in Dearborn, Michigan, for his 
hard work on behalf of workers across Southeast Michigan.
600 as a member in 1973 when he was hired 
at Ford Motor Companys Detroit Parts Distribution Center. He rose 
through the ranks of the unions leadership, serving in many roles 
including Financial Secretary, Bargaining Committee-person, and Vice 
President before holding the role of President from 2009 until 2023. 
a key role in negotiating national labor contracts for 
Ford laborers over the past twenty years, amassing gains for workers 
and keeping jobs from being eliminated. He drew experience from his 
start as an hourly worker while keeping an eye towards the future to 
lead with compassion and advocate for the workers best interests.
  Please join me in recognizing the numerous and remarkable 
contributions of Mr. Bernie Ricke to Southeast Michigan, and Michigans 
12th Congressional District.
RECOGNIZING DARREN CORSONS RETIREMENT AFTER 40 YEARS OF SERVICE WITH 
                            of pennsylvania
I rise today to recognize a notable 
constituent from my district, Mr. Darren Corson of Newtown, 
Pennsylvania who is retiring after over 40 years of dedicated service 
as a Public Servant.
  Darren graduated from Temple University with a bachelors degree in 
accounting. After graduation, Darren made the decision to devote his 
career to public service and joined the Department of Treasurys 
Internal Revenue Service (IRS) where he remained for over 40 years.
  During his career, Darren spent time working in many parts of the 
IRS, including Criminal Investigations Division, Exam, and Problem 
Resolution. In 2000, Darren joined the Taxpayer Advocate Service after 
Congress ordered the creation of a Taxpayer Advocate as an independent 
organization within the IRS.
  Since then, he has worked tirelessly to advocate for the rights of 
taxpayers facing individual and systemic issues. However, after forty 
years of dedicated government service and leadership, Darren is 
retiring.
  Today, I am proud to recognize Darren Corson as an individual who has 
devoted his career to public service in an organization that impacts 
all Americans across the country. We are incredibly grateful for the 
impact Darren Corson has made throughout his long career at the 
Internal Revenue Service. As an avid sports fan, he will enjoy spending 
more time rooting for the Phillies.
  We are all incredibly grateful for the positive impact Darren has had 
through his long career, and we wish him countless blessings during his 
retirement.
I rise today to recognize this years NCAA 
Division Two Mens and Womens Basketball Champions: the Minnesota 
State University Mankato Mavericks.
  Both Mankatos mens team and womens team took home this years 
championship trophy--making the Mavericks the first school in forty 
years to win a double national championship. In fact, its only the 
third time in history that any school won both the mens and womens 
championships in the same season.
  Under the leadership of Coach Matt Mergenthaler, Mankatos mens team 
earned their first national title by defeating Nova Southeastern 88 to 
85, finishing with a 35 and 2 record, while Coach Emilee Thiesses 
womens team defeated Texas Womans University 89 to 73, securing their 
second-ever national title and ending the season with a record of 32 to 
5.

  Thanks to the tireless leadership and encouragement from the teams 
coaches, staff, families, classmates, and community--these talented 
young men and women earned a state championship title and all of us 
across southern Minnesota are incredibly proud to call them our own.
  Congratulations to the Mavericks on an unbelievable season.
Title IV of Senate Resolution 4, agreed to by the Senate of February 
4, 1977, calls for establishment of a system for a computerized 
schedule of all meetings and hearings of Senate committees, 
subcommittees, joint committees, and committees of conference. This 
title requires all such committees to notify the Office of the Senate 
Daily Digest--designated by the Rules Committee--of the time, place and 
purpose of the meetings, when scheduled and any cancellations or 
changes in the meetings as they occur.
  As an additional procedure along with the computerization of this 
information, the Office of the Senate Daily Digest will prepare this 
information for printing in the Extensions of Remarks section of the 
Congressional Record on Monday and Wednesday of each week.
  Meetings scheduled for Thursday, May 23, 2024 may be found in the 
Daily Digest of todays Record.

                                 MAY 29
     2 p.m.
       Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe
         To receive a briefing on Ukrainian culture in wartime.
                                                         RHOB-2359

                                 JUNE 4
     2 p.m.
       Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe
         To hold hearings to examine supporting Georgias 
           sovereignty and democracy.
                                                               TBA

                                 JUNE 5
     10 a.m.
       Committee on Environment and Public Works
         To hold an oversight hearing to examine the budget of the 
           Federal Highway Administration.
                                                            SD-406

                                JUNE 12
     10 a.m.
       Committee on Environment and Public Works
         To hold hearings to examine the Presidents proposed 
           budget request for fiscal year 2025 for the Fish and 
           Wildlife Service.
                                                            SD-406
I rise today to celebrate the Bicentennial of 
Lorain County, Ohio. The perseverance of pioneers and settlers to 
overcome the challenges faced during the early years of the countys 
history has persisted throughout the past 200 years. The hard work and 
spirit shown by generations of county residents have made Lorain County 
an outstanding example of American ingenuity.
  In 1822, the Ohio Legislature enacted legislation creating Lorain 
County; however, the county became judicially independent in 1824. The 
original proposed name for the county was ``Colerain, but the final 
name ``Lorain was chosen by Heman Ely, who had previously founded and 
named the City of Elyria. The countys name is based on the former 
German and now French province of Lorraine and encompasses roughly 923 
square miles. The county is an asset to the great State of Ohio through 
its many contributions in the fields of manufacturing and agriculture.
, by remembering the 200th Anniversary of Lorain County, 
community members recognize the outstanding achievements, maintain the 
pioneer attitude, and strive to better their county through the 
principles on which it was founded. Thank you and congratulations to 
Lorain County on this significant milestone.