I rise today to celebrate the 
career of Dr. Robert Simari, executive vice chancellor for the 
University of Kansas Medical Center, who will be retiring from the 
University of Kansas on June 30, 2024.
  Dr. Simaris career has been marked by a distinguished commitment to 
uplifting the medical community and paving the way for critical medical 
research and advancements.
  The staff and students at KU are fortunate to have had Dr. Simari as 
a part of their community throughout his career. Dr. Simari graduated 
from the KU School of Medicine in 1986 before going on to serve as vice 
chairman of the Mayo Clinics Division of Cardiology Diseases. He then 
returned to KU as executive dean of the School of Medicine from 2014 to 
2019.
  Dr. Simari then began serving in his most recent position as 
executive vice chancellor of the KU Medical Center, where he has been 
credited with leading the Center during a particularly transformational 
period. He took part in hiring the deans of the schools of Medicine and 
Nursing, helped the KU Cancer Center earn comprehensive designation 
from the National Cancer Institute, led a commitment to building a 
valued and respected workforce, and helped grow KUs research 
infrastructure in such a way as to enhance KUs status of one of the 
Nations top research institutions.
  As KU continues to produce excellent medical professionals, cutting-
edge researchers, and lifesaving health discoveries, we will have Dr. 
Simaris legacy to thank. His service to the Kansas City community and 
the medical community at large will be forever cemented by these 
contributions, and Im incredibly grateful for his lifelong dedication 
to the health and well-being of our region.
I rise today to honor Mrs. 
Flora Wilson, a distinguished native of Batesville, Mississippi.
a prominent Batesville, Mississippi, native who 
has resided in the City of Indianola since 1969. A respected member of 
her community, Mrs. Wilson is well known for her dedication, 
generosity, and service.
a proud mother of four, a grandmother of twelve, and a 
great-grandmother of four. She started working at a daycare at the age 
of 18, marking the beginning of her journey of dedication and service 
to people. After serving for twenty years at Stapleton-Staple Cotton 
Cooperative, she worked for nine years at Harvest Select Catfish Farm 
to wrap off her professional career. She retired in 2004 to take care 
of herself and her only daughter during a health difficulty.
  After retiring, Mrs. Wilson has embraced an active and purposeful 
life. As the church mother at Mt. Zion Church of God in Christ (COGIC) 
in Rolling Fork, Mississippi, she has cornmitted herself to full-time 
church service and serves her congregation by offering spiritual 
support and advice. She also acts as a caretaker, lending her empathy 
and support to others in need.
  Additionally, Mrs. Wilson has also continued to use her skills as a 
seamstress, repairing and altering clothing for residents. Her work not 
only meets a practical need but also fosters a sense of community and 
care among her neighbors. Moreover, she has been an unwavering 
supporter of her granddaughters,

Marion, gospel music career. Traveling extensively to attend Marions 
performances and offering her love and encouragement every step of the 
way.
, always volunteering to help her family and the 
community. Her employment as a seamstress and her nurturing obligations 
in her family and church are just two examples of the various ways her 
hands have been endowed.
  The life of Mrs. Flora Wilson serves as an example of the strength of 
love, religion, and devotion. Her daily life will continue to inspire 
future generations, and her efforts have left a lasting impression on 
those who were lucky enough to know her.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in recognizing Mrs. Flora 
Wilson for her hard work and dedication to her community.
I rise today to honor the life of 36-year-old 
Minneapolis Police Officer, Jamal Mitchell, who was killed in the line 
of duty in Minneapolis on Thursday, May 30, 2024. Officer Jamal 
Mitchell joined the Minneapolis Police Department in 2022. Those who 
knew Officer Mitchell saw him as a community leader, a changemaker and 
a peacekeeper.
  Officer Jamal Mitchell will be remembered for his compassion, 
bravery, and love of people. His courageous efforts were apparent early 
on when he saved an elderly couple from a burning home.
  Officer Mitchell showed up to work every day to help keep our 
communities safe. He was known to have a big heart and chose to use his 
love of people to help strengthen our communities and support young 
people. Even as a police officer, Officer Mitchell found time to give 
back to the community by helping coach first- and second-grade boys 
basketball teams.
  Officer Mitchell died a hero and will be dearly missed by those who 
knew and loved him. He is survived by his partner, mother, stepfather, 
siblings, and his children.
I rise today to recognize the Borba Dairy 
Family as they are awarded the title of 2024 Dairy Family of the Year. 
Frank G. Borba. Sr. immigrated from the Azores Islands of Portugal to 
the United States in 1914 at the age of 18. He worked various jobs 
until he had the opportunity to start his own dairy in 1924. In 1920, 
Frank married Esperanza (Belmeira) Berberia and they welcomed their son 
Frank Jr. in 1928. In 1939, the dairy moved to its current location in 
Porterville, California. Frank Jr. worked on his fathers dairy and 
took over operations in 1951. In 1953, he married Nadine Bettencourt. 
Together they had 5 children--Susanna, Frank, Chris, Eric, and Mary--
who were raised on the family dairy. In 2000, a partnership was formed 
that established Borba Dairy. Today, the family operates three dairies 
and takes great pride in their family-owned business. This June, the 
Tulare Chamber of Commerce, Tulare County Dairy Women, and California 
Milk Advisory Board are hosting the Annual Salute to Dairy and Dairy 
Princess Coronation in celebration of National Dairy Month. Each year, 
Salute to Dairy recognizes a local dairy family for their dedication to 
the dairy industry and engagement with the community. The Borba Dairy 
Family is being recognized due to their longstanding commitment to 
producing quality dairy products and continuing their family legacy. 
, I ask my colleagues in the United States House of 
Representatives to join me in celebrating the Borba Dairy Family as 
they are awarded the title of 2024 Dairy Family of the Year. Their 
contributions to the Central Valley will be felt for generations to 
come.
today I want to recognize Brightmoor 
Connection, a community food bank and so much more, as they officially 
open the doors of their new location in Detroit and announce their 
newest programming and partnerships within this community space.
  Brightmoor Connection grew out of a consortium of 9 local churches 
who came together in 2008 in order to address growing food scarcity 
concerns for local families. More than that, their unique client-choice 
approach affords residents dignity while they receive the help they 
need. In their new space, Brightmoor Connection will grow its network 
of partners to serve even more communities and families in need. They 
will also launch their newest youth programming for young 
entrepreneurs.
  Please join me and the 12th Congressional District in celebrating the 
opening of Brightmoor Connections new location and announcement of its 
new programs and services to our community.
RECOGNIZING DR. AL MIJARES SERVICE TO ORANGE COUNTY AS THE OC 
                             of california
I rise today to ask my colleagues to join me 
in recognizing Dr. Al Mijares service to Orange County as the Orange 
County Superintendent of Schools.
  Dr. Mijares has served as the Orange County Superintendent of Schools 
since August 2012, where he led Orange County educators in equipping 
our students with all the necessary tools to ``lead the nation in 
college and career readiness and success. Under his leadership, the 
Orange County Department of Education was able to help students from 
Orange County outperform the state and regional averages. Dr. Mijares 
should be commended for all his hard work throughout his career and his 
dedication to educating the next generation of Americans.
, please join me in recognizing Dr. Al Mijares for his 
service.
today I want to recognize Assistant Fire 
Chief Jeremy Kurek for his 22 years of service with the Dearborn Fire 
Department in Michigans 12th District Strong.
  Assistant Fire Chief Kurek began his career as a firefighter with the 
Dearborn Fire Department in 2002. He has been steadfast in his 
commitment to the people of Dearborn and upholding public safety, 
serving in multiple roles including Engineer, Lieutenant, and Captain 
before being promoted to Assistant Fire Chief. Assistant Chief Kurek 
has been recognized for his outstanding service many times, earning the 
John D. Dingell Medal of Freedom Memorial Commendation and Firefighter 
of the Year Award in 2019. These are the highlights of a long and 
outstanding career, with extensive recognition to public service.
  Please join me in recognizing Assistant Fire Chief Jeremy Kurek for 
more than 20 years of service to the people of Michigans 12th District 
as we wish him well in his retirement.
I rise today to recognize Lieutenant 
Colonel Alexander D. Burgos for his selfless service and dedication to 
the service members, families, and civilians of Picatinny Arsenal, New 
Jersey. It is my privilege to honor a leader that has served and 
supported New Jerseys 11th Congressional District, the State of New 
Jersey, and our country. I look forward to his continued success and 
contributions to our Nation.
  Lieutenant Colonel Burgos graduated from the Virginia Polytechnic 
Institute and State University (Virginia Tech), commissioned into the 
U.S. Army Infantry, and entered active duty in May 2005. He held a 
variety of leadership positions as an Infantry Officer prior to 
entering the Military Intelligence Corps at the rank of Captain. As a 
Military Intelligence Officer, Lieutenant Colonel Burgos served in a 
variety of assignments from Company Command to the Joint Chiefs of 
Staff level.

  Lieutenant Colonel Burgos has led with tenacity as the Garrison 
Commander of Picatinny Arsenal since June 2022. The installation 
employs more than 6,000 employees, all of whom he cares for as his own 
family. His leadership has prioritized the quality of life of the 
soldiers, civilians, and families of Picatinny Arsenal. Lieutenant 
Colonel Burgos has shaped Picatinny Arsenal into a world class 
workplace, home, and mainstay of the New Jersey economy.
  During his time at Picatinny, Lieutenant Colonel Burgos has also been 
a valued partner to me and to my team. His expertise, openness, and 
willingness to think outside the box have strengthened my work in 
Congress and made me a better, more effective advocate for our service 
members and their families. I also especially appreciate his service on 
my Academy Nomination Board to help recognize our next generation of 
military leaders as they look to attend the military service academies.
  I extend my most heartfelt thanks to Lieutenant Colonel Burgos, and 
his family, for their 19 years of service and sacrifice. I congratulate 
Lieutenant Colonel Burgos on his next assignment at the Army War 
College and look forward to his continued success.
I rise today to pay tribute to Ted Danson 
and Mary Steenburgen for their deep and abiding allyship to the LGBTQ+ 
community. They did so early in their careers, at a time when we were 
without many allies who would stand with us. Their courage is to be 
commended.
  Ted Danson is known to many through his leading roles on hit TV shows 
and movies, like ``Cheers and ``The Good Place. He has used his 
platform as a bully pulpit, fervently championing marriage equality and 
vocally opposing discrimination against LGBTQ+ people. He has used his 
star power for good, raising money for LGBTQ+ advocacy groups that 
fight for a more just and equal society. By bringing the power of his 
celebrity to bear, Danson exemplifies the profound impact public 
figures can have in shaping a more inclusive and accepting society.
  Mary Steenburgen has built a career on playing warm and wise 
characters--winning an Oscar along the way--but also one deeply 
entwined with advocacy for the LGBTQ+ community. From ``Philadelphia 
to ``Happiest Season, she has found ways to use her public persona to 
advance the cause of LGBTQ+ rights and visibility. Rarely has any one 
person been able to combine their artistry and advocacy into one, 
complete body of work. She is a wonder.

  Together, Ted and Mary form a formidable team whose combined efforts 
have significantly bolstered the LGBTQ+ movement. Their enduring 
commitment to championing LGBTQ+ rights highlights the indispensable 
role of influential allies in the ongoing struggle for equality and 
underscores the transformative power of advocacy.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in recognizing these two 
remarkable artists and advocates, who are true allies to LGBTQ+ people 
everywhere.
I rise to acknowledge members of the 
Association of Equipment Distributors from all over the country who are 
in D.C. this week for their annual fly-in. In fact, some of them are 
joining us in the gallery tonight. These great men and women are 
entrepreneurs who provide millions of pieces of equipment to all kinds 
of industries in our country every year that help our countrys 
economy. They deserve our admiration and thanks. They certainly have 
mine.
I rise today to honor David 
Casey and his 29 years of public service and dedication to the City of 
Pomona with the Operative Plasterers and Cement Masons International 
Association, Plasterers Local 200.
  David joined the union in 1995 and became a business agent for the 
union in 2012. In 2022, he was appointed as a business manager for the 
Plasterers Local 200. Throughout his time with the union, he also 
served on the Apprenticeship Committee mentoring the next generation of 
plasterers entering the field. In 2001, David was instrumental in 
leading a ``Labor to Neighbor program in the City of Pomona. This 
program was designed to help seniors improve their homes while 
beautifying the neighborhood. Through the Plasterers Union 
Apprenticeship Program, led by David, local apprentices would work to 
re-plaster homes of pre-approved low-income seniors.
  David officially retired on March 24, 2024. I hope that he gets to 
rest and enjoy time with his wife, Cyndee, and children, Jason, Kerry, 
and Stewart. We are grateful for his service to our community.
  For his outstanding accomplishments, it is my honor to recognize 
union leader David Casey. His years of civic service are worthy of 
commendation.
today I honor the 
remarkable life of Mr. Wayne Smith, who passed away on June 6, 2024, 
and offer my sympathy to his family. I am grateful for his service to 
our country as a distinguished maritime captain and an influential 
legislative figure, notably contributing to the U.S. House Committee on 
Merchant Marine and Fisheries. His dedication to community service, 
creative spirit, and transformative mentorship leaves behind an 
enduring legacy of compassion and leadership. I include in the Record 
the following obituary for Wayne Smith:

       Wayne Smith was born on December 10, 1945, in Winchester, 
     Massachusetts, where he grew up alongside his beloved sister 
     Wendy, whom he adored.
       Wayne graduated from Abingdon High School in 1963 and went 
     on to receive his bachelors degree from the U.S. Merchant 
     Marine Academy in 1968. His maritime career was distinguished 
     by his service as a Captain, commanding U.S. Naval 
     Oceanographic vessels and traveling the world.
       From 1975 to 1987, Wayne made significant contributions to 
     the U.S. House Committee on Merchant Marine and Fisheries. As 
     Staff Director of the Subcommittee on Oceanography and the 
     Subcommittee on Fisheries and Wildlife Conservation and the 
     Environment, he played a pivotal role in shaping maritime and 
     environmental legislation. Concurrently, he served as Chief 
     of Staff to Congressman and Senator John Breaux of Louisiana, 
     where his leadership and expertise were invaluable.
       In 1981, Wayne, joined forces with Senator John Breaux, who 
     was then serving as the captain of the Mystick Krewe of 
     Louisiana. Together, they conceived a grand and ambitious 
     idea: Louisiana Alive! They aimed to celebrate and showcase 
     the vibrant and diverse culture of Louisiana, extending 
     beyond the well-known charm of New Orleans to include the 
     rich traditions and unique flavors of all the states 
     parishes. Their vision was to create an event that captured 
     the essence of Louisianas music, cuisine, and heritage, 
     offering an immersive experience that highlighted the best 
     the state had to offer.
       In recognition of Waynes extraordinary creativity, 
     dedication, and inclusive spirit, Louisiana Alive! 2025 is 
     set to proceed as a tribute to his legacy. This event will 
     not only honor Waynes contributions but also continue his 
     mission of celebrating Louisianas unique cultural tapestry.
       In 1987, Wayne founded ThePOTOMACGroup, where he served as 
     President and CEO. Under his visionary leadership, the firm 
     thrived, representing individuals, associations, and Fortune 
     500 companies with distinction.
       Waynes commitment to community and education was evident 
     in his service as Vice Chair of the Washington International 
     School and his longstanding board membership with the CASI 
     Foundation for Children, where he focused on adoption issues.
       Wayne celebrated 37 years of sobriety, during which he 
     dedicated himself to helping others achieve the same, 
     transforming countless lives through his unwavering support 
     and mentorship. His crowning achievement came in 1999 when he 
     and Don adopted their son, Qwan. As a devoted and supportive 
     father, Wayne nurtured Qwan with boundless love and guidance, 
     playing a pivotal role in his development into the remarkable 
     gentleman he is today. Waynes commitment to both his 
     sobriety and his family is a testament to his character, 
     illustrating the profound impact one person can have on the 
     lives of many. His legacy of compassion and resilience 
     continues to inspire all who knew him.
       Waynes legacy is one of empathy, wisdom, humor, and 
     stability. He will be remembered for his class, style, 
     elegance, and fierce compassion. His cultivated appreciation 
     for art and color enriched the lives of all who knew him.
       Wayne is survived by his loving husband, Don Schimanski; 
     his cherished son, Qwan Smith; his nephews, David and Doug 
     Deker; and many beloved in-laws, nieces, and nephews.
       Waynes life was a tapestry of compassion, leadership, and 
     unwavering commitment to those he loved and the causes he 
     championed. His memory will live on in the hearts of all who 
     were fortunate enough to know him.
Title IV of Senate Resolution 4, agreed to by the Senate of February 
4, 1977, calls for establishment of a system for a computerized 
schedule of all meetings and hearings of Senate committees, 
subcommittees, joint committees, and committees of conference. This 
title requires all such committees to notify the Office of the Senate 
Daily Digest--designated by the Rules Committee--of the time, place and 
purpose of the meetings, when scheduled and any cancellations or 
changes in the meetings as they occur.
  As an additional procedure along with the computerization of this 
information, the Office of the Senate Daily Digest will prepare this 
information for printing in the Extensions of Remarks section of the 
Congressional Record on Monday and Wednesday of each week.
  Meetings scheduled for Thursday, June 13, 2024 may be found in the 
Daily Digest of todays Record.

                                JUNE 14
     9:30 a.m.
       Committee on Armed Services
         Closed business meeting to continue to markup the 
           proposed National Defense Authorization Act for fiscal 
           year 2025.
                                                            SR-222

                                JUNE 18
     10 a.m.
       Committee on Appropriations
       Subcommittee on Defense
         To hold hearings to examine proposed budget estimates and 
           justification for fiscal year 2025 for the National 
           Guard and Reserves.
                                                            SD-192
       Committee on Appropriations
       Subcommittee on Transportation, Housing and Urban 
           Development, and Related Agencies
         To hold hearings to examine unlocking Department of 
           Transportation financing for more transit-oriented 
           housing development.
                                                            SD-138
       Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation
         Business meeting to consider S. 4207, to reauthorize the 
           spectrum auction authority of the Federal 
           Communications Commission.
                                                            SR-253
       Committee on Finance
         To hold hearings to examine work and Social Security 
           Disability benefits, focusing on addressing challenges 
           and creating opportunities.
                                                            SD-215
       Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions
         Business meeting to consider an Authorization for 
           Investigation into the Outrageously High Prices Novo 
           Nordisk Charges for Ozempic and Wegovy in the United 
           States Compared to Other Countries, an Authorization 
           for Subpoena of Doug Langa, Executive Vice President of 
           North America Operations for Novo Nordisk and President 
           of Novo Nordisk Inc., for Testimony Relating to the 
           Committee Investigation into the Outrageously High 
           Prices Novo Nordisk Charges for Ozempic and Wegovy in 
           the United States Compared to Other Countries, and 
           other pending calendar business.
                                                            SD-562
       Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
         To hold hearings to examine origins of COVID-19, focusing 
           on available evidence.
                                                            SD-342
     2 p.m.
       Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
       Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations
         To hold hearings to examine Boeings broken safety 
           culture, focusing on testimony from CEO Dave Calhoun.
                                                            SD-342
     2:30 p.m.
       Committee on Energy and Natural Resources
       Subcommittee on Public Lands, Forests, and Mining
         To hold hearings to examine S. 2944, to enable the people 
           of the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico to determine the 
           political status of the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, 
           and S. 3231, to enable the people of Puerto Rico to 
           choose a permanent, nonterritorial, fully self-
           governing political status for Puerto Rico and to 
           provide for a transition to and the implementation of 
           that permanent, nonterritorial, fully self-governing 
           political status.
                                                            SD-366
       Committee on Foreign Relations
       Subcommittee on Near East, South Asia, Central Asia, and 
           Counterterrorism
         To hold hearings to examine the Presidents proposed 
           budget request for fiscal year 2025 for the Middle East 
           and North Africa.
                                                            SD-419
     2:45 p.m.
       Committee on Rules and Administration
         To hold an oversight hearing to examine the Smithsonian 
           Institution.
                                                            SR-301

                                 JULY 9
     10 a.m.
       Committee on Environment and Public Works
       Subcommittee on Transportation and Infrastructure
         To hold an oversight hearing to examine the GSAs Public 
           Buildings Service.
                                                            SD-406
UNWINNABLE RACE: CONGRESSS RESPONSIBILITY TO PREVENT A NUCLEAR ARMS 
                                  RACE
I rise today to call on this body to 
fulfill its responsibility in addressing an existential challenge 
facing our nation. For decades, nuclear weapons have threatened the 
safety of our country and our planet. Today, as nations re-arm and 
competition re-emerges, we run the risk of repeating our past mistakes 
and entering a new cold war. A nuclear arms race is well underway, and 
it poses an existential threat to all. This Congress must stand up and 
stop the escalatory spiral before its too late.
  Its well past time for our voices, the voices of restraint and risk 
reduction, to be heard in the nuclear arms debate. The United States, 
the Russian Federation, and the Peoples Republic of China are locked 
into an extraordinarily dangerous nuclear arms race. All three 
countries are rapidly increasing their nuclear firepower with new and 
more capable bombs, more long-range missiles, new stealth delivery 
systems, bombers, and submarines. And as tensions heighten, all of this 
is dependent on the newest field of warfare: space. All three countries 
depend upon their space assets to observe, detect threats, and 
communicate the commands to act.
  We must cut through the rhetoric of fear and doomsaying that 
dominates our nuclear policy debates. We can no longer allow the 
thoughtful, calm voices to be drowned out by fearmongering cries. We 
must rise above the noise. Instead of developing cost-effective 
military systems that provide security while defusing tensions, we have 
fallen into the fallacy that more missiles make us more secure. Nothing 
could be further from the truth.
  Today, we must call out the failures of our current approach to 
nuclear modernization and demand that we treat arms control and de-
escalation with the same dedication and focus we give to our nuclear 
weapons development. It is long past time to develop a strategy that 
sets priorities, recognizes limitations, and strives for a safer 
future.
  It is important to step back and consider the history and broader 
context of nuclear weapons and Congressional involvement. Since their 
development almost 80 years ago, the destructive capability of nuclear 
weapons has terrified and shocked, but also led governments to pursue 
their own arsenals and develop the capacity to destroy our civilization 
multiple times over. Governments have justified expanding stockpiles 
with convoluted theories of nuclear deterrence that often defy common 
sense.
  It wasnt until arms control programs and treaties were established 
that Russia and the United States de-escalated this spiral of 
stockpiling bombs. Through four decades, progress was made, the number 
of deployed and existing nuclear bombs was reduced, and even the most 
adversarial countries agreed that ``a nuclear war cannot be won and 
must never be fought. Yet, despite this understanding, we continue to 
maintain and modernize our arsenals with a belief that these weapons 
dissuade others from employing theirs. The threat of nuclear conflict 
remains, and with it, life on our planet ending or becoming 
dramatically changed.
  It would be useful to remind people of the arms control agreements 
and the leaders that negotiated them. Im sure that some of my 
congressional nuclear warriors would be surprised to see that their 
most ardent national security heroes negotiated the reductions and 
controls.
  I recognize the nuclear threats posed by countries like North Korea, 
Russia, and China. I do not deny the challenging security environment 
we face. I am fully aware of the Taiwan/China threat, as well as 
Chinas military buildup and South China Sea expansion. The North 
Korean regime is dangerous and could precipitate a conflict at any 
moment. I condemn Russias unprovoked invasion of Ukraine, 
irresponsible nuclear saber-rattling, and dangerous nuclear exercises.
  Despite these serious threats, we must be wise in preparing our 
defense and response. Aggression should not be our first thought when 
faced with threats, uncertainty, and misunderstandings. Therefore, I 
strongly support efforts by the U.S. and Chinese governments to engage 
in meaningful dialogue that results in specific, concrete actions to 
reduce the risk of miscommunication or escalation.
  As we navigate these complex geopolitical landscapes, it is 
imperative that we pause and reflect on the strategies guiding our 
nuclear policy. Strategy must be more than a word thrown on top of 
grandiose statements. True strategy is making the hard choices to align 
our countrys limited resources with our unlimited aspirations.
  The greatest problem facing our nuclear strategy today is that we 
fail to realistically consider that balance, revisit our assumptions, 
adjust course when programs fail, and figure out new paths forward. 
Once approved, weapons programs persist, even when they nearly double 
and triple their budget. No one stops and says, ``Enough.
  Too often, we allow these debates to be driven by military 
calculations and how ``experts would fight a nuclear war. But we must 
not forget that in a democratic society, the military is the extension 
of the political and not the other way around. When it comes to 
programs and strategies that threaten our very existence, we, as a 
whole society, must decide what costs we should bear and what risks we 
must take. Our nuclear strategy must be balanced and rational, allowing 
for deterrence and defensive actions while encouraging collaboration 
for a more peaceful future.
  We in Congress are part of the problem. We have bought into the 
assumption that more nuclear weapons will make us safer. Ever-growing 
costs reflect the irrationality that has plagued our nuclear policy. In 
the name of ``modernization, weve taken on hundreds of billions of 
dollars of additional spending, and the nuclear accounts grow without 
question or scrutiny.
  An example is the nuclear modernization efforts. The political price 
tag for New START was the modernization of all three legs of Americas 
nuclear triad. Proponents told us the multi-billion-dollar cost was 
necessary to ensure that we continue to have a viable deterrent. Today, 
we can and should debate whether every part of modernization is cost-
effective and necessary for deterrence. We must also fully understand 
the reasons for the massive growth in the cost of all these programs.
  Lets turn to the new Sentinel ICBM, which is destined to replace the 
Minuteman III. It has incurred an egregious 37 percent cost overrun, 
making the programs cost almost 211 percent higher than the Air 
Forces initial 2015 estimate. This has triggered a critical Nunn-
McCurdy cost overrun, forcing a stop and a full statutory review. 
Despite the new estimated cost of $130 billion, there are loud and 
clear reflexive signals that the Pentagon and Congress intend to plow 
ahead no matter the cost or the necessity. ``Well do whatever is 
necessary.
  While this may be convenient, the law requires a complete and full 
review that addresses five critical steps. (1) The program is essential 
to national security; (2) there are no alternatives to the program that 
will provide acceptable capability; (3) the new cost estimates have 
been determined to be reasonable; (4) the program is a higher priority 
than programs whose funding will be reduced to cover the increased cost 
of this program; and (5) the management structure is sufficient to 
control additional cost growth. It is imperative that the Pentagon 
conduct a thorough examination to assess the necessity and feasibility 
of continuing the program in its current state. Equally necessary is 
that Congress engage in a full debate to assess the Pentagons 
rationale. Without public pressure, it is doubtful that any hearings 
will occur, and thats why our Congressional Nuclear Weapons and Arms 
Control Working Group will hold its own hearing on July 24th.
  For years, Congress has dictated in the annual NDAA that the U.S. 
maintain a minimum of 400 ICBMs. A number founded not on logic but 
because ``thats what we have always had. The number of ground-based 
ICBMs should not be set by the number of existing concrete silos but in 
the honest analysis of nuclear strategy. Such a review must consider 
the risk of a catastrophic mistake inherent in the Sentinel program. In 
the event of an attack, it is assumed that the first target is the 
well-known locations of the ICBMs. Its a use-it or lose-it situation. 
Therefore, a ``Launch on Warning is the operational imperative. The 
President has only minutes to decide if the attack is real.
  If the nuclear program is for deterrence, then the submarines, 
airplanes, and their missiles offer sufficient firepower to dissuade an 
adversary. These systems have the benefit of stealth, and the President 
has the time to gather all information and then decide to use the 
nuclear response. If that werent enough, we also have ample 
conventional weapons capability to deter potential adversaries.
  However, the Sentinel program is not the only problem. The hidden 
costs of ground-

based ICBM modernization are found in unexpected and little-noticed 
places like the ``Energy and Water appropriations bill, which would 
spend $19.8 billion for ``Weapons Activities, a $2.7 billion increase 
from the previous year. So, what is the $19.8 billion for? This year, 
the Department of Energy/NNSA requested a $3 billion down payment for 
the production of ``plutonium pits, which are the hollow plutonium 
shells used to trigger the nuclear reaction. On its own, this number is 
astonishingly high, but it doesnt include the anticipated $8 billion 
to build the production facility in Los Alamos and the second facility 
at Savannah River, which alone has a projected total project cost of 
$18-25 billion, nearly six times the initial estimated cost for 
construction. It will be the most expensive building in America. And 
there is the $1.4 billion requested for stockpile sustainment, the $1.1 
billion dollars for the Sentinel warhead development at Lawrence Lab, 
which has grown by 63 percent, and the untold cost of the six other 
warheads and bombs that support the other nuclear modernization 
programs.
  Even proponents of modernizing nuclear programs should be concerned 
about the high costs. The January 2023 GAO report found that the NNSA 
has not developed a comprehensive schedule or cost estimate and has not 
identified all necessary activities or milestones to achieve the 
required 80-pit-per-year production capacity. And why do we need to 
produce 80 pits per year when America already has over 4,000 plutonium 
pits in storage? Has anyone studied the potential of repurposing these 
pits for the new bombs? The bottom line is this: Senior officials at 
the NNSA admit they wont meet deadlines and have no idea what the 
ultimate cost will be.
  I have tried to force common-sense reforms to better estimate cost. 
For example, I offered a straightforward amendment that would change 
the current law requiring 80 pits per year to a lower number that 
represents the realistic number of plutonium pits our country needs and 
can feasibly produce. To some, this is seen as an ``extreme radical 
position, and my proposal was voted down. Time and time again, I have 
been denied the opportunity to bring important nuclear matters to the 
floor for debate.
  Across the nuclear enterprise, costs are soaring, fears are growing, 
and it remains unclear what goals we are achieving. Yet, amidst soaring 
costs and escalating risks, its imperative to reassess our nuclear 
priorities. Investing more of the modernization budget into diplomacy, 
arms control, and education could yield far-reaching benefits, 
fostering a stronger and more secure nation. Congress must fulfill its 
duty to allocate taxpayer funds responsibly, avoiding excessive 
expenses on wasteful nuclear programs that do little to enhance genuine 
security. Maintaining a ``safe, secure, and effective deterrent does 
not necessitate these costly modernization plans, especially given the 
pressing needs in other areas critical to national strength and 
stability.
  The significance of arms control cannot be overstated. Prioritizing 
de-escalation isnt just an idealistic notion; its a necessity. Arms 
races cannot be won. When we attempt to outpace our adversaries in 
weapon development, they inevitably respond in kind, draining our 
limited resources and fostering international instability as fear 
predominates and the worlds most devastating weapons become a more 
likely option.
  The critical role of arms control in preserving global stability and 
security is evident from historys many close calls. We cant afford to 
wait for another Cuban missile crisis to recognize the dangers of 
miscommunication and the failure to engage in dialogue.
  Only a few lonely congressional voices have joined the clarion call 
put forth by the Arms Control Association, Ploughshares, Council for a 
Livable World, Union of Concerned Scientists, Friends Committee on 
National Legislation, Nuclear Threat Initiative, and other well-known 
arms control organizations. Year after year, funding proposals and 
resolutions to support non-proliferation, nuclear fissile material 
control and verification, and weapons negotiations have been made to 
draw attention to the importance of arms control. Like Sisyphus pushing 
the boulder up the hill, it is often thankless work, fighting and 
clawing for progress only to see it roll back down again, as had 
happened in the Intermediate Range Nuclear Missile Treaty, New START, 
and the Iran nuclear agreement. But the work could not be more 
important. Unlike that Greek myth, I do believe that we can get the 
boulder to the top of the hill and develop robust arms control regimes 
that will help us all to avoid an existential threat.
  There are three key pillars in this endeavor. First, knowledge of the 
destructive power of nuclear weapons and an understanding of their role 
in modern warfare. The library is full of studies on nuclear war, 
deterrence, the risks of misunderstanding, compelling arguments for 
risk reduction, and the value of arms control. We cannot forget the 
horrors that nuclear weapons would inflict if they were ever used 
again. This work cannot be understated. Its been 79 years since 
Hiroshima and Nagasaki and 40 years since the movie ``The Day After 
aired, showing Americans and their leadership just how terrible such an 
event would be. It is a hard truth, but one we must face. We cant 
allow nuclear weapons rhetoric to be divorced from the very real 
consequences of their use.
  Secondly, encouraging dialogue and fostering open communication 
channels are essential. While it may appear impossible to have any arms 
control negotiations with Russia as it conducts its war of aggression 
in Ukraine, it is important to remember that many of the previous arms 
treaties with Russia began at the moment of maximum international 
tension. The recent dialogues with Chinas political and military 
leaders are encouraging. We should accept Chinas offer to discuss ``No 
first use policy. We dont know where the discussion may lead, but 
its an opening.
  Lastly, garnering political support is crucial. Non-profits and 
advocacy groups have laid the groundwork; now, we must amplify their 
efforts and call on Congress to act. For too long, our focus on arms 
control has waned, and members of Congress have paid too little focus.
  This is the moment to redouble our efforts. In a world marked by 
uncertainty and growing competition, building bridges and fostering 
understanding is more critical than ever. However, this effort must 
start at home. Inevitably, Congress must reconcile our infinite desires 
with our limited means. That means making hard decisions about how and 
where to spend taxpayer dollars to achieve real security. Hundreds of 
billions of dollars and 14 years have been spent in the modernization 
of Americas nuclear weapons programs, and it has yielded a three-
nation nuclear arms and space race. Are we more secure?
  The Sentinel ICBM program, now estimated to be $150 billion, breached 
the cost escalation limit of the Nunn-McCurdy law. The Pentagon and 
Congress must now justify the continuation of the program. Congress and 
the American public must not waste this pivotal moment to study the 
reality of the nuclear weapon arms race and make a decision to shift 
course. Its past time to maximize our efforts to negotiate an end to 
the race and seek paths to reduce nuclear arms and the associated 
existential threat.
  We face real challenges in this world, but too often, hyperbole and 
fear are being used to drive our decision-making. Competition need not 
mean hostility. It is time we returned to reason and rationality. 
Together, we must confront the challenges before us, not by building 
ever more dangerous weapons, but by placing the same priority on 
effective arms control and risk reduction measures that we currently 
place on modernization. We may face challenges, but we still have the 
choice of which future we will pursue. We know the risks, we know the 
dangers that modernizations and the inevitable arms race could hold, 
but thats why it is so important we redouble our efforts toward making 
de-escalation real. Let us take this moment, this opportunity, to 
engage in a meaningful dialogue and choose the path towards a safer and 
more world.