I rise today to recognize 
a lifelong patriot and soldier who has proudly served our great Nation 
in uniform for more than 30 years. After a storied career marked by 
professional exceptionalism and taking on new challenges without 
hesitation, Brigadier General Matthew Higer will be enjoying his well-
earned retirement. While the team at Edwards Air Force Base will surely 
miss his leadership, General Higer will undoubtedly be enjoying the 
opportunity to spend more time with loved ones.
  Prior to his command of the 412th Test Wing. General Higer began his 
career attending some of our nations finest military learning 
institutions, earning his commission from the Air Force Officer Reserve 
Training Corps at the University of Southern California and going on to 
attend the United States Army War College and the United States Naval 
Postgraduate School. Between his stints at these schools, General Higer 
served as a test pilot, evaluator pilot, and instructor pilot. No 
matter which role he was serving in at the time, Higer consistently 
distinguished himself from his fellow airmen through his hard work 
ethic and commitment to the pursuit of excellence. Over

the course of his career, General Higer has piloted 40 different types 
of aircraft and accrued over 3,000 military flight hours.
  General Higer is concluding his admirable career at Edwards Air Force 
Base as commander of the 412th Test Wing, but this was not his first 
time in what is first time in Californias ``Aerospace Valley. He 
first came here as a student-pilot in 2003, attending the world-famous 
U.S. Air Force Test Pilot School and setting himself apart from the 
rest of his class with his skill and tenacity. While he went on to 
fulfill different roles around the country, General Higer couldnt stay 
away from Edwards AFB for long. He returned in 2017 and served as 
Commandant for the same test pilot school he graduated from as a young 
soldier, and later ascended to the position of Commander for the 412th 
Test Wing. Under his leadership, Edwards Air Force Base has remained 
the center of the flight testing universe, overseeing the testing of 
such programs as the F-16, T-38, T-7 A, F-22, F-35, C-12, C-17, KC-135, 
KC-46. B-1, B-2, B-52, B-21. Because of the work of General Higer and 
the brave men and women under his command, our nation is better 
prepared and equipped for the future and positioned to exceed our 
enemies in next-generation air dominance.
  Once again, I want to recognize and sincerely thank Brigadier General 
Higer for his lifetime of service to our great Nation. I know myself, 
our community, and all those at the 412th Test Wing will be wishing him 
nothing but happiness and prosperity in his retirement.
I rise today to honor the service and 
heroism of U.S. Army Specialist Charlie Simpson, Jr. Mr. Simpson was 
drafted into the United States Army in 1968 and went to Basic Training 
in Fort Ord, California. After Basic Training, he successfully 
completed Advanced Infantry Training and later, Jump Training School. 
He then received orders to join our brave soldiers in Vietnam.
1, 1969, while serving the United 
States of America, and he was hospitalized in Japan for 30 days. He 
returned home to the U.S. in December 1969, and recuperated at the 
Fitzsimons General Hospital in Denver, Colorado, for 1 year. As a 
result of his combat service-connected injuries, Mr. Simpson lost both 
of his legs. He received an honorable discharge in 1970, and he was 
recognized for his tremendous service with the awarding of a Purple 
Heart and other prestigious medals. With such serious injuries, some 
would have given up, but thats not Charlie Simpsons way. After his 
discharge from the Army, Mr. Simpson returned home to Malvern, 
Arkansas, where he met his wife, Brenda, and where they made a 
tremendously full life together. The Simpsons have 5 children: Aaronda 
McNair and her husband, Tony, Veronica Rose and her husband, Cletis, 
Charlie Simpson, III and his wife, Nikya, Leticia Franklin and her 
husband, Kevin, and their dearly beloved, deceased son, Aaron Simpson. 
They have also been blessed with 11 grandchildren and 2 great-
grandchildren to carry-on the legacy of their brave grandfather and 
great-grandfather.
, we often mention the sacrifices our men and women in 
uniform and their families make for our country, and rightly so. But 
today, along with our thanks, let us also celebrate the good work and 
contributions these soldiers, airmen, and marines have made in their 
communities. I would like to thank Specialist Simpson for his 
tremendous sacrifice for our nation and wish him well as he continues 
working for the people of Malvern, Arkansas. All Arkansans are 
eternally grateful for his service.
I rise today to honor the remarkable career 
of Lieutenant Commander Judith Robertson. Lieutenant Commander 
Robertson, a resident of Easley for nearly three decades, was the first 
female Physician Assistant in the United States Navy and a trailblazer 
in her field.
  In 1974, Lieutenant Commander Judith Robertson entered the United 
States Navy and later graduated from the Sheppard Air Force Bases 
Physician Assistant Program with a Bachelor of Science and a Master of 
Physician Assistant Studies from the University of Nebraska. 
Ultimately, earned the title of the first female Physician Assistant, 
paving the way for countless women to follow in her footsteps. During 
her time in the U.S. Navy, she used her knowledge and training to 
provide OB/GYN services to Vietnam refugees at Talega Camp Pendleton, 
California. Her dedication and commitment to serving her country is 
evident in her 30-plus years of active service, during which she 
exemplified the highest standards of professionalism and excellence. 
For her service, she was awarded three Navy and Marine Corps 
Commendation Medals, two National Defense Service medals, the 
Meritorious Unit Commendation, the Good Conduct Medal, and the 
Humanitarian Service Medal.
  Since she retired from active duty in 1998, Lieutenant Commander 
Robertsons passion for helping others has not waned. Since settling 
down in Easley, South Carolina, she has continued to contribute to her 
community as a volunteer at Easley Baptist Hospital, selflessly giving 
her time and expertise to assist those in need. Her humility and 
willingness to serve are attributes that make her an invaluable member 
of her community.
, Lieutenant Commander Judith Robertsons tireless 
dedication and unwavering commitment to service, in both the United 
States Navy and Easley Baptist Hospital, have left a lasting impact on 
my constituency. It is a privilege to celebrate the service of 
Lieutenant Commander Robertson and the barriers she has broken through 
her service in the United States Navy. This has made her an inspiration 
and role model for countless young women and service members. I am 
honored to represent the third district of South Carolina and to 
celebrate the exceptional individuals who make a difference in our 
community and country.
I rise to honor a truly remarkable 
individual, Ms. Flo Bellamy, whose dedication, passion, and selfless 
service to the citizens of Johnson County, Tennesse, have left an 
indelible mark on our community.
  I have personally witnessed Flos unwavering commitment to the youth 
of our community. One of Flos most outstanding attributes is the 
genuine love she extends to each child, and it is on display every day 
at the Community Center. This is a woman who, for three years, worked 
without a salary, driven by a vision to establish an afterschool and 
summer program for our youth. Her sacrifices, from collecting 
essentials for the disadvantaged to ensuring that many children receive 
their only meal outside of the school system, showcase her 
unprecedented dedication.
  In addition to her work with the youth, Flo has been a beacon of hope 
for cancer patients, assisting them in navigating their journey, from 
finding care to arranging transportation to medical appointments. Her 
connection to this cause is personal and sincere. Having witnessed the 
devastating effects of cancer in her own family, Flo took the reins of 
the American Cancer Societys county-wide walk for cancer. Even as the 
names and structures of these efforts evolved, Flos leadership 
remained constant, her shift from fundraising for research to directly 
benefiting local cancer patients made a significant difference in the 
lives of many.
  Furthermore, Flos teachings have sowed the seeds of understanding, 
tolerance, and unity. She taught respect for all, regardless of race, 
religion, or disability. Due to her influence, I firmly believe that 
the younger generation in our community now embraces differences more 
openly and warmly than ever before.
  However, the testament to Flos legacy isnt just in the programs she 
led or the funds she raised. Its in the heartfelt stories of grown 
adults, once children under her wing, who approach her in public to 
express their gratitude and love. Its in the newfound perspectives and 
attitudes she fostered in a community that has historically faced its 
own set of challenges.
  As I stand here, my heart swells with gratitude for Flo Bellamy. Her 
decades-long service, from leading the Johnson County--Mountain City 
Community Center to being an unwavering advocate for the most 
vulnerable, has left a mark that will echo across generations. We all 
owe her an immense debt of gratitude.
  I invite my colleagues and the citizens of Johnson County to join me 
in saluting our precious Flo. Her work and her spirit embody the very 
best of our community. We love and cherish her, and I am honored to 
have this opportunity to recognize her monumental contributions.
I rise today along with my colleague, 
Rep. Mike Thompson, to honor the life and lasting contributions of Mrs. 
Sue Augustine, longtime Solano County resident. Passing away at 82, 
, leadership, 
and service to her community and family.
  Born in 1940, in Detroit, Michigan, Mrs. Augustine demonstrated a 
hardworking and tenacious spirit from a young age. After graduating 
from St. Marys High School in Mount Clemens, Michigan, she worked as a 
receptionist and switchboard operator for the City of Mt. Clements, 
where she met and married Mr. Len Augustine.
, ultimately leading them to establish a permanent home 
in Vacaville. Mrs. Augustine was a critical member of the Solano County 
community, working as a library assistant at both Vacaville libraries 
and volunteering for numerous charities. From crocheting for Hearts and 
Hands to supporting St. Marys Church to serving at the Church Food 
Locker, Mrs. Augustine embodied the spirit of generosity and 
selflessness in every aspect of her life.
, but also for her genuine kindness and compassion. Her 
willingness to lend an ear and a helping hand to anyone in need earned 
her the widespread respect and gratitude of her community. Mrs. 
Augustine impacted the lives of countless members of her community and 
her steadfast leadership, constant smile, and patient mentorship 
undeniably enhanced the lives of her fellow Solano County residents.
, 
son, grandchildren, and great-grandchildren. We would like to extend 
our deepest sympathies to Mrs. Augustines loved ones. We know that 
they, along with the people of Solano County, join us in celebrating 
her life and legacy.
I rise today to recognize the Stafford 
County NAACP in honor of 67 years of service to the community.
  Founded in 1956, the Stafford County NAACP has worked tirelessly ``to 
ensure the political, educational, social, and economic equality of 
rights of all persons and to eliminate race-based discrimination, 
working to build a better future for everyone in Stafford County.
  As the first and longest-serving president of the Stafford County 
NAACP, Frank White, Sr. laid the groundwork for this branchs long-term 
commitment to service. His legacy continues through his son, Frank 
White, Jr.--an active member.
  Under the current leadership of President Yolanda Roussell, the 
Stafford County NAACP continues to be a beacon in the community through 
its activism, partnerships with local churches, support for Black-owned 
businesses, voter registration drives, and community forums on African 
American history, public education, and mental health.
  The Stafford County NAACP brings the entire community together for 
large celebrations--including the Stafford County NAACP Martin Luther 
King, Jr. Celebration and the Stafford County NAACP Juneteenth 
Commemoration and Celebration. These events would not have been 
possible without the hard work of its members.
  The Stafford County NAACP has demonstrated a fervent commitment to 
our communities and an extraordinary devotion to the strength and 
prosperity of our Commonwealth. As the U.S. Representative for 
Virginias Seventh District, I am honored to recognize this 
organization for its tremendous record of service to Stafford County--
and I thank the Stafford County NAACP for building a stronger Virginia.
today, I introduce the Bayard Rustin Stamp 
Act. This bill would direct the United States Postmaster General to 
issue a forever stamp to commemorate the life and work of Bayard 
Rustin. I introduce this bill with Congressman Ritchie Torres. We 
introduce this bill now to coincide with the 60th anniversary of the 
March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom, which occurred on August 28, 
1963, and the anniversary of Rustins death, which occurred on August 
24, 1987.
  Born March 17, 1912, Bayard Rustin became one of the most important 
leaders in the 20th century civil rights movement. At a young age, 
Rustin learned the values of nonviolence and peacekeeping from his 
grandparents Quaker faith, and he would continue to build these values 
into his life as a civil rights movement leader.
  Rustin attended City College of New York, where he joined a 
progressive club that aimed to remedy racial issues during turbulent 
times. His time with the club was short-lived, but it inspired him to 
join the Fellowship of Reconciliation, an organization that became a 
champion for labor rights, equity and world peace.
  Rustins time with the Fellowship of Reconciliation led him to become 
a leader in the 1947 ``Journey to Reconciliation, where white and 
Black people across the South rode buses together to challenge 
segregation laws, a precursor to the Freedom Rides.
  Rustin was an advisor in Martin Luther King, Jr.s inner circle as 
King advocated pacifism and nonviolence for achieving equal treatment 
for African Americans. Rustin applied his brilliant strategic mind to 
execute aggressive, peaceful action in the civil rights movement and 
throughout his life as an activist.
  His most important role was as the chief organizer of the historic 
March on Washington, the largest demonstration ever organized at the 
time, in which a quarter of a million people turned out to demand civil 
rights for African Americans.
  In the years after the civil rights movement, Rustin, a gay man, 
inspired others to advocate for and to achieve rights for LGBTQ people. 
He remained a strategist and public speaker for workers rights 
movements, including co-founding the A. Philip Randolph Institute, an 
organization for Black trade union members. Rustin remained committed 
to promoting social good, and advocating for the disenfranchised, until 
his death.
  I urge my colleagues to support this bill.
today, I introduce the District of Columbia 
Board of Zoning Adjustment Home Rule Act. This bill would give the 
District of Columbia the authority to appoint the members of the D.C. 
Board of Zoning Adjustment (Board), except when the Board is performing 
functions regarding an application by a foreign mission with respect to 
a chancery. The Board issues special exceptions, or variances, to the 
regulations issued by the D.C. Zoning Commission (Commission). This 
bill would not alter the authority of the Board.
  Under current law, in general, the Board consists of a representative 
each from the National Capital Planning Commission (NCPC), which is a 
federal agency, and the Commission, each of whom may be a federal 
official, and three mayoral appointees, subject to D.C. Council 
approval. The Board has no authority over federal property.
  Under current law, when the Board is performing functions regarding 
an application by a foreign mission with respect to the location, 
expansion or replacement of a chancery, the Board consists of the 
Executive Director of NCPC, the Director of the National Park Service 
(or, if the President so designates, the Secretary of Defense, the 
Secretary of the Interior or the Administrator of General Services) and 
the three mayoral appointees. This bill would not change this 
composition.
  D.C., like every other jurisdiction in the United States, should be 
free to set its own local land-use policies. This bill is an important 
step to increase home rule for D.C. I urge my colleagues to support it.
today I am honored to recognize 
the impact of Calvary Baptist Church of Buffalo. Calvary Baptist will 
celebrate its 85th anniversary on September 15, 2023, which will mark 
several decades of critical service to our community and its residents.
  Calvary began on Clinton Street with Rev. Polite in 1938, and through 
the years, has become a staple of the Western New York region. This 
church is compassionate and dedicated to the mission of helping others, 
and they do this through local and global leadership that focuses on 
fostering strong intergenerational disciples. The efforts in Christian 
education have made significant impacts on the lives of many, and the 
nurturing of all followers (of every generation) is a testament to the 
love and unity within this church family. Every day, our community 
ought to recognize and appreciate the leadership and members of Calvary 
for their selfless work and devotion. Their contributions to the 
betterment of our community have not gone unnoticed, and their impact 
extends far beyond the walls of the congregation.
  Reverend Corey Bernard Gibson of Buffalo, New York, was named as the 
seventh and current pastor of the Calvary Baptist Church. Pastor Gibson 
has continued to carry out community service, catering to both 
spiritual and social needs. This includes the continuation of the 
Community Outreach Day and the establishment of a scholarship for the 
local community high school, along with various other events throughout 
the year that focus on benefiting the children of Buffalo. It is 
critically important to recognize such efforts, and I ask that you join 
me in thanking the leaders and membership of Calvary Baptist, alike, 
for their successful endeavors over the last 85 years.
I rise today to honor the distinguished 
career of retired Chief Michael Mertens. Chief Mertens has dedicated 33 
years of his life to the People of New Baltimore, leaving an indelible 
mark on the department and the lives of those he served. He began his 
journey in law enforcement in 1987, graduating with distinction from 
the Macomb Police Academy. Throughout his career, he exhibited 
exceptional leadership and unwavering dedication to public safety.
  As a certified Firearms Instructor, Chief Mertens ensured his fellow 
officers were well-trained and prepared for the challenges they faced. 
He courageously confronted the rising threat of drug-related crimes, 
leading successful investigations and making substantial steps against 
crime, including leading the largest LSD seizure in Michigan at that 
time.
  Selected for the Macomb Countys multi-jurisdictional Special Weapons 
and Tactics Team, Chief Mertens demonstrated considerable bravery and 
commitment to the protection of his community. His promotion to 
Sergeant in 2004 further showcased his leadership abilities and 
dedication to his colleagues.
  Accepted into the esteemed FBI National Academy Associates in 2008, 
Chief Mertens solidified his outstanding qualifications and commitment 
to excellence. As Chief of the New Baltimore Police Department from 
2019, he implemented crucial initiatives, securing resources and 
enhancing public safety measures.
  Beyond doubt, Chief Michael Mertens exceptional career in law 
enforcement has left a lasting impact on the City of New Baltimore. 
Today, we express our deepest gratitude and admiration for his 
unwavering commitment to public safety and his remarkable service to 
our community.
I rise today to recognize an extraordinary 
constituent whose dedication, service, and unwavering commitment to our 
community exemplify core American values.
  Michael Tomtishen, who many throughout the City of New Baltimore 
regard as a `hometown hero, is a veteran of the Vietnam War, a two-
time Purple Heart recipient, and a lifelong resident in his community.
, of 
which two were spent in Vietnam. He assisted in the training of troops 
at Fort Benning in Georgia and was severely injured in combat as a 
result of a landmine. An active member of the Lempke-Blackwell VFW Post 
7573 and AMVETS Post 52, Michael Tomtishen has assisted and 
participated in many local events and parades, once saving an 
onlookers life by performing CPR.
  For 30 years, Mr. Tomtishen has also honored fallen heroes by 
assisting in the placement of American flags--a task he was never asked 
to do. Michael Tomtishen is a hero to many--his selfless commitment to 
those around him is an example for us all to follow.
  With National Purple Heart Day still fresh in our hearts and minds, I 
am beyond proud to honor Michael for his many years of unselfish 
leadership, generosity, and respect for his community. We are all 
indebted to him for the example he sets.
I rise today in recognition of Ronald 
``Ronnie Jett, who has recently passed away, and to honor his service 
to Virginias First District and the Nation.
  Ronnie served as a life member on the Northumberland Rescue Squad and 
is a recipient of the Michael B. Player Award for excellence in EMS. 
His service to his community continued with the Fairfields Volunteer 
Fire Department, where he served as an active member for nearly four 
decades. He has also been recognized as a life member for this service.
  In January 1996, Ronnie was sworn into office for the Northumberland 
County Board of Supervisors for District 5. While on the Board he acted 
as Vice Chair for six years, Chairman for eighteen years, Emergency 
Services Director for eighteen years, and liaison for the Board to the 
Northern Neck Regional Jail since July 2000. His work on the Board 
includes enhancements to the County 911 System, obtaining funding for 
the Fire Department, construction of school complexes, athletic fields, 
and first responder facilities. His loyalty and care for the citizens 
and staff was clearly visible through his work to better his County.
  Ronnie was a family man who survived by his wife, Linda S. Jett, 
daughters, Carrie Jo Jett and Kelly Morgan Jett, stepdaughters Kristi 
and Carlina; eight grandchildren, Kyndal, Karter, Haleigh, Michael, 
Keith, Macey, Dallas, and Michael Jr.; sister, Patsy Basye, and 
numerous caring nieces, nephews, and cousins. He was preceded in death 
by his mother and father, Doris and Wilson Jett, and his brothers, 
Mitchell and Michael Jett. He could often be found spending time with 
his dog, Mia, or on his boat with family when he was away from his 
businesses, Smith Point Seafood and Cockrells Creek Deli.
, I ask you to join me in recognizing the service, 
accomplishments, and values of Ronnie Lee Jett. May God bless Ronnie, 
and may He look over Ronnies family as we remember his splendid life.
I rise today to wish John 
Townsend a happy 85th birthday.
  John is a native of Talladega County, Alabama. He resides in 
Fayetteville with his wife, Lola M. Townsend. They have been married 
for 56 years. He has one son, John Townsend, Jr., who is married to 
Brenda Townsend and one daughter, Victoria Cook, who is married to 
Alfred Cook, Sr.
: Jalane, Daria. 
Alfred, Jr., Johntavis, Cameron, and Alexandria. He has 8 great-
grandchildren with the youngest 2 of them twin boys.
29 years before 
he retired. He also worked for Parker Fertilizer for many years.
  In his free time, Mr. Townsend enjoys gardening and spending time 
with his family. To

celebrate this milestone, Mr. Townsend is celebrating his 85th birthday 
at Top of the River restaurant with his family and friends.
, please join me in wishing John Townsend a very happy 
85th birthday.
I am here today to extend my deepest 
appreciation and profound gratitude to the extraordinary legislative 
fellows who have graced my office with their unwavering dedication and 
unyielding commitment.
  Members of Congress know well, perhaps better than most, how blessed 
our Nation is to have in reserve such exceptional young men

and women who will go on to become leaders in their local communities, 
states and the Nation in the areas of business, education, law, 
government, philanthropy, the arts and culture, and the military.
  We know this because we see them and the benefits from their 
contributions every day. Many of them work for us in our offices as 
junior staff members, congressional fellows, or interns and they do 
amazing work for and on behalf of the constituents we are privileged to 
represent.
, I believe there is no higher calling than the call to 
serve a cause larger than ourselves.
  That is why I ran for public office. I was inspired to serve by so 
many great public figures that came before me. I was inspired to serve 
by President Kennedy who said, ``Ask not what your country can do for 
you, ask what you can do for your country, and by the Rev. Dr. Martin 
Luther King, Jr. who said: ``Everybody can be great because anybody can 
serve. . . . You only need a heart full of grace. A soul generated by 
love.
  By this measure there are several other great young men and women who 
served as legislative fellows this Spring and Summer in my office. Each 
day, they exemplified the highest standards of excellence, bringing 
forth fresh perspectives, innovative ideas, and an unrelenting drive to 
effect positive change within our cherished community. Their tireless 
efforts to address the diverse needs and pressing concerns of our 
constituents resonate deeply with the values we hold dear.
  In the pursuit of serving the constituents of the 18th Congressional 
District of Texas, their contributions have been nothing short of 
remarkable.
  That is why today I rise to pay tribute to 14 extraordinary young 
persons for their service to my constituents of the 18th Congressional 
District of Texas and to the American people. They are:
  Panashe Siachitema, Texas Tech University; Ramanpreet Kaur, Indiana 
University; Amy Arceo, Texas A&amp;M University; Ainsley Gill, Vanderbilt 
University; Joel Crawford, Harvard University; Kevin Darmadi, George 
Washington University; Lindsey ONeal, Payne International Development 
Fellowship, Niyonsaba Magnifique, Payne International Development 
Fellowship; Vanessa Rogers-Wright, Charles B. Rangel Internatinal 
Affairs Program; Wilson Pemboh, Texas Tech University; Alexandra 
Wilhelm, Pepperdine University; Parker Milligan, Oglethorpe University; 
J Hardy, Howard University; Carrington Blair, Jackson State University.
, the energy, intelligence and idealism that these 
wonderful young people brought to my office and those interning in the 
offices of my colleagues help keep our democracy vibrant. The 
insights, skills, and knowledge of the governmental process they gain 
from their experiences will last a lifetime and prove invaluable to 
them as they go about making their mark in this world.
  Because of people like them the future of our country is bright, and 
its best days lie ahead. I wish them all well.