I rise today to recognize Azahnae Medina 
for earning the Arvada Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth Award.
  Azahnae has achieved great things, all while overcoming adversity and 
challenges along the way. Students like Azahnae, who strive to make the 
most of their education, develop crucial skills and a work ethic that 
will guide them for the rest of their lives. This award is a testament 
to Azahnaes hard work, determination, and perseverance at Arvada High 
School and is clearly just the beginning of a bright and promising 
future.
  It is my honor to congratulate Azahnae Medina on achieving the Arvada 
Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth award.
I rise today in advance of the 300th 
Anniversary of the First Congregational Church and Meeting House in 
Shrewsbury. The Congregation will celebrate this tremendous milestone 
on Monday, December 4.
, the history of the Church spans almost as far back as 
the town itself. In October 1717, the General Court of Massachusetts 
permitted Shrewsbury as a township, as long as 40 families would settle 
there, build a meeting house, and settle an ordained minister within 
three years. With little delay, Reverend Job Cushing was ordained, and 
the original church covenant was adopted on December 4, 1723.
  For 109 years, the meeting house was the site for both church and 
town affairs, until the two separated in 1832. Since its inception, the 
Church has undergone moves, repairs, remodels, and expansions. 
Nevertheless, the Church remained a steadfast community center.
  During its long history, the Church has remained a site of social 
responsibility. The Church championed a Vigilance Committee to support 
the Underground Railroad. Its ministries outreach to those in need. And 
today, the Church is an open and affirming Congregation.
  In 1961, the First Congregational Church of Shrewsbury became part of 
the United Church of Christ. Since then, the Church has opened its 
doors to all, supporting the diverse needs of the Shrewsbury community.
, the First Congregational Church of Shrewsbury strives to 
keep adapting to be in service to all people. I look forward to 
celebrating this crucial community organization on their 300th 
Anniversary. Please join me in paying honor and tribute to the First 
Congregational Church of Shrewsbury.
I rise today to recognize Dayana Banuelos 
for earning the Arvada Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth Award.
  Dayana has achieved great things, all while overcoming adversity and 
challenges along the way. Students like Dayana, who strive to make the 
most of their education, develop crucial skills and a work ethic that 
will guide them for the rest of their lives. This award is a testament 
to Dayanas hard work, determination, and perseverance at Arvada High 
School and is clearly just the beginning of a bright and promising 
future.
  It is my honor to congratulate Dayana Banuelos on achieving the 
Arvada Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth award.
I rise today to recognize Eshaya Gray-
Sullivan for earning the Arvada Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for 
Youth Award.
  Eshaya has achieved great things, all while overcoming adversity and 
challenges along the way. Students like Eshaya, who strive to make the 
most of their education, develop crucial skills and a work ethic that 
will guide them for the rest of their lives. This award is a testament 
to Eshayas hard work, determination, and perseverance at Arvada K-8 
School and is clearly just the beginning of a bright and promising 
future.
  It is my honor to congratulate Eshaya Gray-Sullivan on achieving the 
Arvada Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth Award.
I rise today to express my deepest gratitude 
and admiration for the exemplary service and dedication of Mr. Larry D. 
Smith. It is with great honor that we acknowledge his remarkable 
contributions and years of service to our country and our Military 
Academies. I thank him for his invaluable partnership over the past 
decade as this weekend marks his last round of academy nomination 
interviews that he will conduct in support of my office.
  Born in Los Angeles in 1940, Mr. Smiths journey is one marked by 
commitment and achievement. A graduate of Manual Arts High School in 
1958, he furthered his education at the United States Military Academy, 
earning a BS in General Engineering in 1962. Commissioned as a 2nd 
Lieutenant in the US Army, Armor Branch, Mr. Smiths military service 
took him to Germany, the United States, and Vietnam, where he served 
with distinction in the 11th Armored Cavalry Regiment.
  Transitioning to civilian life in 1970, Mr. Smith embarked on a 
successful career in Commercial Real Estate, notably with Grubb &amp; Ellis 
Company, where he served on the Board of Directors and managed offices 
in the Los Angeles area. His relocation from Southern California to 
Sacramento in 1979 marked the beginning of a new chapter as a 
Commercial Real Estate Developer, leaving an indelible mark by 
constructing the IRS office facility in Sacramento and managing others 
in Nevada, Arizona, and New Mexico. His foray into residential home 
building in 1990 saw the creation and sale of hundreds of homes in the 
Sacramento area, a testament to his enduring entrepreneurial spirit.
  Beyond his professional accomplishments, Mr. Smith has been an active 
and engaged member of the West Point community. Currently serving as 
the President of the West Point Alumni in Northern California, he also 
holds the position of National Trustee for the Association of 
Graduates. His involvement in the West Point Admissions Department and 
his role as the e-mail network moderator for the West Point Parents Net 
(wpp-net) showcase his commitment to the development and support of 
future generations. Mr. Smiths family life is equally commendable, 
having been married to his wife, Maren, for 35 years. His sons, Tom and 
Mark, have followed in his footsteps, with Tom serving as an officer in 
the Army and Mark as a legislative aide to a California State Senator.
  I ask that my colleagues join me in thanking Mr. Larry D. Smith in 
recognition of his outstanding achievements and unwavering dedication 
to public service. His legacy serves as

an inspiration to us all, and we are grateful for his continued 
contributions to the betterment of our community and Nation.
I rise to congratulate Major David 
.
  Major Hoffman started his career with the U.S. Army after graduating 
from Cleveland Marshall College of Law in 1985, when he received his 
commission as a Judge Advocate in the U.S. Army. His Meritorious 
Service Medal, Army Commendation Medal, and Army Achievement Medal are 
a testament to his exceptional achievements and the magnitude of his 
contributions through his service.
  Major Hoffmans commitment to learning was instrumental in his 
success. In 1988, he graduated from the U.S. Armys Command and General 
Staff College. That same year, he graduated from the Army Logistics 
Management College, where he was named as a distinguished graduate of 
the Management of Defense Acquisitions Course.
  On October 2, 1998, Major Hoffman joined the U.S. Army Reserves, and 
on that same date, he joined the U.S. Department of Justice as an 
attorney with the Civil Division, Commercial Litigation Branch. While 
there, he continued to serve the people of Virginia. Since 2005, he has 
served as the Deputy General Counsel for Audit Policy and Contract 
Litigation in the Office of General Counsel for the Defense Contract 
Audit Agency at Fort Belvoir, Virginia. In recognition of his esteemed 
service on behalf of the American people, the Defense Contract Audit 
Agency bestowed Major Hoffman with the Civilian Meritorious Service 
Award.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in celebrating and 
thanking Major David Charles Hoffman for 39 years of service to our 
country and in wishing him the best as he retires to spend time with 
his wife of 43 years, Cheryl, and their two children, Kristin and 
Jonathan.
I rise today to recognize our Texas-24 
Hometown Hero, Dallas Fire-Rescue Captain Kenneth Zacharie. Earlier 
this month at a Nimitz High School basketball game, Kenneth, alongside 
an Arlington Lamar High School Athletic Trainer and Arlington EMS 
supervisor, worked to save a young athlete when she collapsed on the 
court during pregame warm-ups. The young athlete went into cardiac 
arrest and Kenneth swooped into action, using chest compressions and a 
defibrillator. As a result of his heroic actions, the student-athlete 
is now on the road to recovery.
  Kenneths wife coaches the Nimitz High School girls varsity 
basketball team. Luckily, Kenneth brought their three sons to the game 
earlier than usual and was there when the student-athlete collapsed 
before the game began. As the Captain of the Rapid Intervention Team, 
Kenneth is no stranger to serious situations and was able to work with 
others to provide a swift, lifesaving response.
  Id like to thank Captain Kenneth Zacharie for being a shining 
example of the heroes that make North Texas such an amazing community 
to live in.
I rise today to recognize the 
contributions of Commander Christian Woodside, United States Navy, 
during his service as a legislative fellow in my Washington, D.C. 
office this year. Throughout 2023, Christian has played a critical role 
in supporting my work on the House Armed Services Committee and 
representing the proud Navy community in eastern Connecticut.
  As Ranking Member of the House Seapower and Projection Forces 
Subcommittee, which has the solemn, critical duty of overseeing much of 
our nations Navy, Marine Corps, and various Air Force programs and 
policies, his perspective was essential to me and my office. Year in, 
and year out, the Department of Defenses legislative fellowship 
program brings highly talented officers to Capitol Hill who provide 
invaluable benefits to Members of the House and Senate and the defense 
committees. Officers, like Christian, bring real-world experience from 
their time in the classroom at the various academies and experiences 
from their time serving on active duty. This year, as our subcommittee 
actively worked to shape our nations critical shipbuilding programs, 
shipbuilding industrial base development, and Navy and Marine Corps 
readiness through the Fiscal Year 2024 National Defense Authorization 
Act, Christian provided exquisite judgement in navigating the landscape 
of crafting such a large and critical piece of legislation.
  Christian has also seized initiative in a variety of areas beyond 
naval affairs that benefit eastern Connecticut. He worked tirelessly to 
provide insight into our Navys planned shipbuilding programs, visited 
with leadership at Naval Submarine New London to discuss ongoing 
installation operations, and focused on submarine industrial base 
issues crucial to sustaining the Navys fleet. He also used his recent 
shore assignment as a resource sponsor at the Surface Directorates as 
the SSDS and Enterprise Test and Evaluation Officer for N96 to provide 
invaluable insight on the Navys budget process throughout this 
calendar year. Lastly, he engaged in persistent communication with the 
embassies of Australia and the United Kingdom to facilitate various 
engagements in my office and around Capitol Hill and, most importantly, 
leveraged those relationships as the Congress considered legislative 
proposals to execute the trilateral AUKUS security agreement.
  Christians work ethic, diligence, intelligence, and first-hand 
experience as a Surface Warfare Officer made an immediate benefit and 
memorable impact on my office and subcommittee staff. He was also an 
energetic, affable colleague to my entire congressional staff, willing 
to help in small ways and big ways to serve the constituents of 
Connecticuts 2nd Congressional District. His sense of humor and 
thoughtful comments on issues outside of his Navy portfolio were much 
appreciated by the whole team, and they will be friends for life.
  After traveling across the world with tenures on the USS Doyle (FFG 
39) and USS Stout (DDG 55), and numerous shore assignments including 
Integrated Undersea Surveillance System (IUSS) qualification at Whibdey 
Island in the state of Washington, I am thankful for his familys 
tremendous sacrifice to our nation and for landing in the District of 
Columbia for the current phase of their life. Though Christians 
presence will be deeply missed by both my personal staff and Seapower 
staff, I know full-well that he will make his presence known as he 
heads to Naval Education and Training Command to serve as Executive 
Officer aboard USS Mahan (DDG 72).
, as has also been the case for each of his predecessors 
that my office has had the opportunity to host, I have benefitted 
greatly from Christians training and background. This recurring 
process that the fellowship program fosters, strengthens civilian-
military understanding for future leaders of the greatest military in 
the world, which I believe is a necessary component of a strong 
democracy. Our Nation is best served at sea and here onshore by 
officers and leaders of the highest caliber, like Christian. He 
embodies such qualities and has a promising career ahead in continued 
service to our nation, and we owe him such gratitude. I ask that the 
House join me in wishing CDR Christian Woodside, his spouse Leigh Anne, 
and their two daughters, Hannah and Charlotte, the best of luck in 
their next life chapter.
I rise today to recognize Jaylin Martinez 
for earning the Arvada Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth Award.
  Jaylin has achieved great things, all while overcoming adversity and 
challenges along the way. Students like Jaylin, who strive to make the 
most of their education, develop crucial skills and a work ethic that 
will guide them for the rest of their lives. This award is a testament 
to Jaylins hard work, determination, and perseverance at Arvada K-8 
School and is clearly just the beginning of a bright and promising 
future.
  It is my honor to congratulate Jaylin Martinez on achieving the 
Arvada Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth award.
I rise today to recognize Jesus Figueroa-
Arriga for earning the Arvada Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth 
Award.
  Jesus has achieved great things, all while overcoming adversity and 
challenges along the way. Students like Jesus, who strive to make the 
most of their education, develop crucial skills and a work ethic that 
will guide them for the rest of their lives. This award is a testament 
to Jesuss hard work, determination, and perseverance at Jefferson Jr./
Sr. High School and is clearly just the beginning of a bright and 
promising future.
  It is my honor to congratulate Jesus Figueroa-Arriga on achieving the 
Arvada Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth Award.
unfortunately, due to a family 
health issue that required prompt attention, I missed two suspension 
votes last night regarding our greatest ally, Israel. Had I been 
present, I would have voted yes--without reservation--for both 
measures: I unequivocally reaffirm Israels right to exist, and I 
support the immediate release of all hostages taken by the jihadist 
terrorist organization Hamas. I am thankful that my colleagues in 
Congress voted overwhelmingly in favor of these measures. Anyone 
familiar with my voting record knows that I have always stood 
foursquare in support of Israel and will continue to do so. Hamas must 
be eradicated, all prisoners must be released, and we must continue to 
remove any shred of doubt about Israels right to exist.
I rise today in recognition of Officer 
Jeffrey Peirce of the Newfields Police Department for his recent act of 
bravery that earned him the Departments Life Saving Award. When an 
armed man experiencing a mental health crisis needed assistance, 
Officer Peirce relied on his training, experience, and sense of duty to 
effectively de-escalate the situation and help the individual access 
proper care. I commend Officer Peirce on his courage during a difficult 
situation and thank him for his decades of service to the Newfields and 
Rye Police Departments.
  In response to calls about a distressed individual in the police 
departments parking lot, Officer Peirce arrived on the scene ready to 
assist in the de-escalation of a mental health crisis. Without any 
backup Peirce engaged with the man, asking him questions and listening 
to his concerns, empowered by his years of de-escalation training and 
mental health classes. After removing a gun from the individuals car, 
Officer Peirce encouraged the man to travel with him to Portsmouth 
Hospital in order to receive treatment and speak with the staff at the 
Behavioral Health Unit.
  Officer Peirces ability to de-escalate the situation is a result of 
his quick thinking and courage, as well as the professional training in 
mental health affairs he received as a member of the force. By 
listening to the concerns of the individual, acting quickly to withdraw 
and empty his gun, and helping him access the care he needed, Officer 
Peirce demonstrated bravery and empathy, making him truly deserving of 
the Life Saving Award.
  On behalf of my constituents in New Hampshires First Congressional 
District, I thank Officer Peirce for his bravery and recognize him for 
his service to the people of New Hampshire. His heroism and sense of 
duty will serve as a shining example for all Granite State public 
safety professionals. I wish Officer Peirce all the best in his future 
endeavors.
on Saturday, December 16, 2023, Brevard 
County families, businesses and local community organizations will 
gather to celebrate the 15th Annual Family Christmas Extravaganza. This 
wonderful event, which will take place at Fred Poppe Regional Park in 
Palm Bay, FL, will provide an uplifting message of hope and future 
during this Christmas season.
  The House Church, River of Life Christian Center, Elevation Church, 
Eastwind Pentecostal Church, Grace Bible Church, Jornada al Cielo, 
Church on the Rock, Truth Reveal Ministries, Wings of Grace Ministries, 
CITA Rescue Mission, have all united to bring the 15th Annual Family 
Christmas Extravaganza to our City and County.
  Working with several community and business partners such as the City 
of Palm Bay Parks &amp; Recreation, Thrifty Specialty Produce, Chick-Fil-A, 
Fruits of my Labor, Engel &amp; Volkers, Gator Automotive, the Mortgage 
Firm, Frog Bones-Family Shooting Center, Z88.3FM, All Digital All Day, 
Grifols Plasma Distribution Center, Double Scope, Al Dia Today 
Newspaper, Martins Famous Potato Rolls, SMTC Manufacturing, and 
Premiere Oaks 10 Cinema, the mission is to provide a positive venue for 
residents and children to celebrate Christmas, serve others and give 
back to their community.
  Over sixty local businesses and organizations have made donations of 
toys, food, gift certificates, equipment, finances, and goodie bags, 
and will feature musicians and artist such as Unified Sound with Joel 
Lopez, Peabod, Carl Lewis and the Intensity Band, Eddie Anthony as 
Eddie Frost, Jalixa Morales as FA-LA-LA-LA-LIXA and Corey Sprenkle with 
S &amp; S Sound.
  Senior Pastor Ken Delgado of The House at Palm Bay said: ``With 
todays news being filled with division, contention, and expressions of 
hatred, it is exciting to see the City of Palm Bay, along with the 
citys businesses and the citizens, create an event where love, joy and 
peace are expressed. The Family Christmas Extravaganza is the greatest 
expression that so many people yearn for and is what the angels 
proclaimed at the birth of Jesus, saying `Peace and good will towards 
all men.
  The Mayor of the City of Palm Bay, Rob Medina, issued a proclamation 
in support for this years celebration, recognizing the Extravaganza 
has become the largest Christmas party on the Space Coast and December 
16, 2023, as Family Christmas Extravaganza Day.
  The spirit of the holidays is all about giving and spending time with 
loved ones. This years Extravaganza brings our community together to 
remind us of that. I ask my colleagues to join me in saluting all those 
who are doing their part to spread the Christmas spirit this holiday 
season and those who have worked so hard to make the 15th Annual Family 
Christmas Extravaganza possible.
I rise to honor and recognize a local 
television station, WDSU Channel 6, on their 75th Anniversary. On 
December 18, 1948, WDSU became the first television station to ``sign 
on in the State of Louisiana and the Gulf Coast region and for the 
next nine years would remain our only local station.
  Starting with the invocation of archdiocesan chancellor Monsignor 
Charles J. Plauche in 1948, WDSU has been an eyewitness for historical 
moments that have shaped our region. WDSU was on the scene during the 
building of the Crescent City Connection which connects New Orleans 
East Bank to the West Bank. The station was there to provide the first 
live election results in the Greater New Orleans area, and WDSU 
reporters were the only ones to live broadcast the Worlds Fair in New 
Orleans in 1984. The station chronicled the moments leading up to 
landfall of Hurricane Katrina, with coverage during the storm, and the 
days, months, and years following as the people of Southeast Louisiana 
recovered and rebuilt. The station has since covered other major storms 
to hit the area including Hurricanes Gustav, Ike, Laura, and Ida.
  The name WDSU is widely recognized across the Greater New Orleans 
area but not

many know the significance behind the name. The ``W in WDSU is used 
by stations east of the Mississippi River. The ``D honors the Desoto 
Hotel where the original radio station, formerly known as WCBE, 
broadcasted above. The ``S is a nod to the old New Orleans States 
newspaper, and the ``U recognizes Joe Uhalt who bought the original 
radio station.
  It is truly my pleasure to recognize WDSUs 75th Anniversary. On 
behalf of the great people of Louisianas First Congressional District, 
I thank the anchors, photographers, journalists, and the whole staff at 
WDSU for their continued coverage of breaking news, historical events, 
and representation of the Greater New Orleans area, ensuring our 
community is informed and entertained. WDSUs commitment to public 
service and broadcasting does not go unnoticed and is appreciated by 
the entire New Orleans region.