I rise to honor the service and 
accomplishments of Kanko Zonou, my congressional staffer who has 
consistently served my office and the people of Floridas 24th 
Congressional District. Kanko has proven to be a very articulate young 
woman and shows great promise for her future endeavors. Kanko has 
assisted my office in various areas, such as legislative research, 
constituent outreach, and team management. She had demonstrated an 
excellent drive and a continuous willingness to learn.
  Kanko Zonou was born in Lome, Togo and raised in the state of 
Georgia, She is a Magna Cum Laude graduate of Georgia State University 
where she earned her Bachelors degree in Political Science. At Georgia 
State University, she served as Womens Rights chair for the NAACP, and 
she received the Nell Hamilton Trotter Student Leadership Award for her 
service. During her junior year, she presented two research projects 
centered around economic issues at the Southern Political Science 
Associations 2022 annual conference. Kanko is currently a member of 
Alpha Kappa Alpha Sorority, Incorporated. Her experiences have 
empowered her to advocate for human rights, as well as social justice.
  Upon transitioning from my office, Kanko will continue to work in 
legislation as she fights for justice.
  On behalf of Floridas 24th Congressional District, I ask my 
colleagues to join me in honoring Kanko Zonou for her exemplary 
character, dedication to teamwork, and willingness to learn.
I am honored to recognize my constituent, Ms. 
Vera Punke, for turning 108 years old last month.
  Vera was born on August 29, 1915. She celebrated her birthday with 
friends and family around, along with an abundance of Arlington 
dignitaries. Vera has been a highly successful businesswoman, community 
organizer, co-founder of the Womans Youth League of Rhode Island, Den 
Mother, Brownie and Girl Scout Leader, Mother, Grandmother, and Great 
Grandmother. She has been an exemplary volunteer at The Jefferson 
community and remains as active, engaged, energetic, and decisive as 
ever.
  Vera always remains available to anyone needing a helping hand, a 
shoulder to cry on, a sympathetic listener to anyone just wanting to 
talk, and an inspiration to anyone who knows her lifes story. She 
lives by her personal motto: ``If I have helped ease one ache or pain, 
I have not lived in vain. Arlington is honored to celebrate her 
accomplished life and this milestone birthday.
today I rise to recognize a cultural 
staple in Middle Tennessee that has left an indelible mark on the 
history of the Volunteer State for over a century. Each year, 
communities across Tennessee unite in celebration of the rich tradition 
of rhythmic flatfoot buckdancing through the National Buckdancing 
Championship.
  The annual National Buckdancing Championship has recently experienced 
a change of venue, with the Tennessee Old-Time Music and Dance 
Association now shouldering the responsibility of commemorating this 
time-honored tradition. Through their production of the Thomas Maupin 
Festival, affectionately known as MaupinFest, in Unionville, Tennessee, 
the Tennessee Old-Time Music and Dance Association has played a pivotal 
role in preserving this significant piece of American cultural 
heritage. I want to express my heartfelt appreciation to the Uncle Dave 
Macon Days Association, who diligently oversaw the National Buckdancing 
Championship annually since 1986 when Congress entrusted them with this 
duty, up until 2019. Since its inception in 2019, the Tennessee Old-
Time Dance Association has organized MaupinFest and has continued to 
bestow the title of National Buckdancing Champion on behalf of Uncle 
Dave Macon Days. In light of this transition in production, the Uncle 
Dave Macon Days Association has expressed their desire to transfer the 
responsibility for the National Buckdancing Championship permanently to 
the Tennessee Old-Time Music and Dance Association.
  MaupinFest aims to pay tribute to Mr. Maupins dance style, which 
stands as the quintessential representation of traditional Tennessee 
rhythmic flatfoot buckdancing, distinct from the more common clogging. 
Mr, Maupins old-time buckdancing style merits preservation as a 
cherished Tennessee treasure. Therefore, I proudly announce that 
henceforth, the title of National Old-Time Buckdancing Champion will be 
conferred by the Tennessee Old-Time Music and Dance Association. This 
ensures that this historical American art form receives the recognition 
it so rightfully deserves.
I rise today to salute the Clemenceau 
Heritage Museum for their unwavering dedication to preserving the rich 
history of Arizonas Verde Valley. Originally opened in November 1991 
through the efforts of the Verde Historical Society, the museum 
showcases artifacts and pieces of historical significance that are 
indicative of the rich heritage of both our district and state.
  Since 1991, the members of the Verde Historical Society have been 
committed to ensuring that our communitys history is honored and 
maintained through the museums educational services to the public. The 
Verde Historical Societys vision made the museum a reality and their 
continued faithfulness enables the history of Verde Valley to be 
appreciated by all residents of the valley today. The countless hours 
they devote to the upkeep of the museum is commendable, and through 
their work, the history of the region is kept alive.
  The Museums exhibits and displays have blessed our community with a 
steady reminder of where we came from and the factors, including 
mining, ranching, and farming, that empowered our society and economy 
to prosper.
  I applaud the Verde Historical Society for their commitment to 
presenting the history of the region and for carrying the torch 
necessary for current and future generations to enjoy and benefit from 
our heritage.