I rise today to honor the extraordinary life 
and global leadership of His All-Holiness Ecumenical Patriarch 
Bartholomew. He is the spiritual leader of more than 300 million 
Orthodox Christians worldwide and a tireless advocate for peace, human 
rights, and interfaith dialogue.
  As the Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople, recognized as the 
senior primate of the Orthodox Christian world, His All-Holiness has 
dedicated more than three decades to advancing religious freedom, 
protecting our planet, and fostering understanding across faiths and 
nations. This month, he visits Washington, D.C., following his 
acceptance of the prestigious Templeton Prize in New York City, joining 
the ranks of past recipients such as Mother Teresa, the Dalai Lama, and 
Archbishop Desmond Tutu.
  Throughout his tenure, Patriarch Bartholomew has met with presidents, 
popes, and parliaments across the globe, including multiple visits to 
the White House and the United States Congress. He has worked 
courageously to defend religious liberty despite ongoing challenges in 
his native Turkey. His commitment to peace and reconciliation, despite 
significant challenges, embodies the highest ideals of global religious 
leadership.
  Known also as ``the Green Patriarch, His All-Holiness has been a 
pioneering voice on environmental issues, organizing international 
interfaith summits to confront climate change and ecological 
degradation as spiritual and moral imperatives. His leadership has 
inspired generations to see care for the Earth as a sacred 
responsibility.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in recognizing His All-
Holiness Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew for his profound 
contributions to global peace, interreligious cooperation, and the 
advancement of human dignity. His presence in our Nations capital is a 
powerful reminder of the vital role that faith leaders play in building 
a more just, compassionate, and united world.
I rise today to honor the 
remarkable leadership and lifelong contributions of Mrs. Katie Blount, 
whose tenure as Director of the Mississippi Department of Archives and 
History (MDAH) has left an enduring mark on our state.
1994 as a public relations coordinator and steadily rose 
through the ranks. She served as assistant to the director for 
communication, working under former directors Elbert R. Hilliard and H. 
T. Holmes. In 2015, she was appointed as the agencys seventh director, 
becoming only the second woman to lead MDAH since its founding on 1902. 
Over the course of more than three decades of service, Mrs. Blount has 
provided steadfast leadership and vision, culmination in her announced 
retirement effective June 30, 2026.
  Under her stewardship, MDAH has grown into a nationally recognized 
institution. Mrs. Blount guided the creation of the Two Mississippi 
Museums, preserving and sharing the diverse storIes of our state, and 
she championed the public engagement that supported adoption of 
Mississippis new state flag. She also worked tirelessly to strengthen 
relationships with Tribal partners through repatriation and advanced 
preservation projects across the state, including the new Vicksburg 
Civil War Visitor Center, the stabilization of Windsor Ruins, 
enhancements at the Grand Village of the Natchez Indians, and the 
development of Margaret Ann Crigler Park in Jackson.
  Her vision for inclusive storytelling reshaped programming and 
interpretation at MDAH, ensuring that the voices and histories of all 
Mississippians are represented. Earlier this year, the American 
Association for State and Local History honored Mrs. Blount with a 
Lifetime Achievement Award, recognizing her extraordinary dedication to 
public history.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in recognizing Mrs. Katie 
Blount for her steadfast commitment to preserving the heritage of 
Mississippi and for her outstanding service to our communities. Her 
leadership has endured that future generations will better understand 
and appreciate the rich and complex history of our state.
HONORING THE 5TH PASTORAL ANNIVERSARY OF PASTOR STEPHEN ``CHUCK NASH, 
                                  JR.
it brings me great joy to congratulate 
Pastor Stephen ``Chuck Nash, Jr. on celebrating five years of 
pastorship and ministry at the Mount Horeb-Belt Line Baptist Church in 
Lancaster, Texas. What began with an answered call by father and son 
has grown and flourished into a vast congregation between two 
locations. Pastor Nash, Jr.s steadfast leadership has provided his 
congregation a place of peace and support in North Texas.
  A Dallas native, Pastor Nash. Jr. began as an assistant youth pastor 
after graduating from Booker T. High School of the Engineering 
Professions in Houston. He earned his degree in Religion with a minor 
in Social Work from Texas College in Tyler. Together, he and his 
father, Dr. Nash, founded Mount Horeb Missionary Baptist Church-DeSoto, 
later expanding to Lancaster, offering spiritual guidance to the 
communities of DeSoto, Lancaster, and Cedar Hill. With honors like 
Young Minister of the Year and his role as Assistant General Secretary 
of the Baptist Missionary and Education Convention, Pastor Stephen 
Nash, Jr, has proven himself a dedicated leader to the North Texas 
community.
  Being entrusted with caring for Gods children is no easy feat. It is 
evident that the leadership of Pastor Nash, Jr. is God-fearing and 
operates with a community-focused mindset through weekly services and 
the Horeb Student Ministry. I thank him for his selflessness and for 
doing the work to care for the constituents of the 30th Congressional 
District. I congratulate him again on five years of ministry.
I rise today to solemnly honor the courage and 
sacrifice of the correctional officers and civilian employees who lost 
their lives at Attica Correctional Facility during the prison riot 54 
years ago this week. The events that began on September 9, 1971, 
represent one of the most tragic chapters in our states history and 
serve as a solemn reminder of the extraordinary risks borne by those 
who serve behind prison walls.
  These men and women went to work that day committed to doing their 
duty--protecting their colleagues, maintaining order, and serving the 
public good. Their lives were cut short in an instant of violence, but 
their legacy endures.
  Today, we formally recognize and honor their memory. Their sacrifice 
stands as a testament to the professionalism and courage of the 
thousands of correctional officers and civilian staff who serve every 
day under challenging and often dangerous circumstances.
  We owe these fallen heroes our deepest gratitude. May their names be 
remembered, their service honored, and their families comforted in 
knowing their loved ones sacrifices will never be forgotten.
  I ask that the United States House of Representatives join me in 
paying tribute to those who made the ultimate sacrifice at Attica 
Correctional Facility and in recognizing the ongoing commitment of our 
Nations correctional workforce.
I rise today to recognize and honor the 
marriage of Alexandra Heller and Joshua Narciso. It is with profound 
joy and admiration that I extend my heartfelt congratulations to them 
on this special occasion. Their wedding day is not only a celebration 
of their love but also the beginning of a journey built on partnership, 
resilience, and shared purpose--their own love story, written in real 
time.
  I have had the privilege of watching Alexandra grow both personally 
and professionally during her time in my office. I have seen firsthand 
the determination and resilience she brings to every challenge and the 
compassion and thoughtfulness with which she approaches each task. She 
has consistently shown an unwavering commitment to serving others, and 
I could not be prouder of the leader and the person she has become. 
Truly, she has shown us all what it means to be fearless.
  I will always remember the pivotal moments she helped us achieve 
together. Her dedication and persistence were instrumental in advancing 
the designation of the Chuckwalla National Monument, ensuring the 
protection of our desert lands for future generations. She also 
contributed greatly to the passage of the PACT Act, landmark 
legislation that delivers long-overdue health care and justice to our 
Nations veterans. These accomplishments are historic--proof that she 
has always had the courage to speak now and fight for what matters.
  What has impressed me most, however, is not only her professional 
success, but also her strength of character. She lifts others up, she 
brings people together, and she embodies a spirit of service and 
compassion that is rare and deeply inspiring. These are the same 
qualities that will sustain her in marriage--the kind of love that 
makes every day feel like daylight.
  I also want to share a bit about how Alexandra and Joshuas story 
began. On their first three dates, Joshua playfully ``swept Alexandra 
off her feet with what sounded like a whirlwind world tour to 
Barcelona, France, and Italy. In reality, the story is just as 
charming: they first met at a restaurant called Barcelona, then 
attended a wine event at the French Embassy, followed by a holiday 
party at the Italian Embassy. When the world shut down, Joshua showed 
up at Alexandras apartment with a suitcase . . . and never left. It 
seems they knew then that they were enchanted to meet each other.
  Marriage, like public service, is rooted in trust, resilience, and 
love. It is about showing up for one another through both triumphs and 
challenges, through sunshine and midnights, and walking forward 
together. The compassion, joy, and strength she brings will help build 
a solid foundation for her and Joshua.
  I am excited to see the life they will create together, grounded in 
respect, laughter, and shared vision. May their marriage continue to 
inspire, bringing joy to themselves and those around them.
  As they start this new chapter, may they cherish the small moments as 
much as the milestones. May they celebrate laughter, lean on compassion 
in tough times, and nurture a love that grows deeper with each year. 
Just as her service has touched many lives, her partnership will be a 
reminder to us all that ``You Belong With Me isnt just a lyric, it 
is a promise.
  It is a true honor to witness this day and to celebrate their union. 
Please know that they carry with them not only my warmest 
congratulations but also my deepest admiration and pride. May their 
marriage be blessed with health, happiness, and a love that truly never 
goes out of style.
it is with great enthusiasm that 
I rise to recognize the exceptional work of the Urban League of Broward 
County on its 50th Anniversary.
  The National Urban League is a historic civil rights organization 
dedicated to elevating the standard of living in historically 
underserved urban communities. The Urban League of Broward County was 
founded in 1975 as an affiliate of the National Urban League, and since 
then, this community-based organization has been dedicated to 
empowering communities and changing lives.
  The League helps communities in need gain power and independence by 
promoting civil rights, economic self-reliance, and social equality. 
They offer programs in education, job training, housing, and 
entrepreneurship to empower residents.
  The League helps our community achieve these goals through a variety 
of programming--from their Summer Enrichment Program, which offers 
students the opportunity to create, discover, and learn, to ADVANCE-U, 
which offers a full range of essential economic resources for residents 
to help them succeed in the workforce, stabilize their finances and 
build assets.
  The Urban League of Broward Countys commitment to the health and 
wellness of Browards families is extensive and impressive. And the 
pivotal role it plays for South Florida families is invaluable. I am 
grateful to the leadership and staff for their tireless efforts to 
fight for the rights of my constituents and all Americans to live with 
freedom, dignity, and prosperity.
  I thank President and CEO, Dr. Germaine Smith-Baugh, and everyone at 
the Urban League of Broward County for improving the lives of those in 
Floridas 25th Congressional District and across Broward County. I 
congratulate them on 50 remarkable years.
though I was present on the floor, I 
missed Roll Call vote No. 246, on Congresswoman Maces Amendment No. 14 
to the defense authorization bill. I intended to and would have voted 
no.
  This amendment cruelly denies transgender service members access to 
gender-affirming medical care through TRICARE. Every sailor in our Navy 
begins at Naval Station Great Lakes in my district, and they deserve 
the best care this country can provide. To deny them that care is to 
betray their service and lose our moral compass.
I rise today to recognize the impressive 
efforts of Kyla Guerrero, a constituent of mine from Bend, Oregon. Kyla 
has used her Gold Award Girl Scout project to tackle the issue of food 
waste, taking leftover food and repurposing it to sustain a local farm. 
I am truly impressed by her innovation and hard work. This creative 
compost system keeps our community eco-friendly and helps protect our 
planet for future generations. I thank and congratulate Kyla. I include 
in the Record this article from the Central Oregon Daily written by 
Jakob Salao that details Kylas hard work:
       BEND, Ore.--More than one-third of all available food in 
     the country goes to waste, according to the U.S. Department 
     of Agriculture. A Central Oregon Girl Scout is hoping to 
     change that by taking that waste and using it to sustain a 
     local farm. ``Ive always had a passion for supporting 
     environmental efforts and I feel like this was a way I could 
     create a project that suits those passions, Girl Scout Kyla 
     Guerrero said. ``And working with a local farm has been super 
     fun. Guerrero is one of two local Girl Scouts working on a 
     Gold Award Project. Shes partnered with Around the Bend 
     Farms to get youth involved and make farming a little more 
     eco-friendly.
       ``Were creating this food scrap to compost system where 
     the food scrap waste from the Bethlehem Inn kitchen gets 
     delivered here and turned into compost which is used for the 
     farms agriculture, Guerrero said. Those food scraps 
     contain vital nutrients for vegetables that would otherwise 
     rot away in a landfill. ``By throwing those nutrients into a 
     compost pile and into that kind of system, we can re-collect 
     the nutrients and re-integrate it into our soil to rebuild 
     that cycle, Urban Farm Manager Josh Lesko said. ``Then, our 
     plants are just re-feeding themselves and feeding us more in 
     the future.
       The compost system also helps keep the farm eco-friendly. 
     ``Were lowering the amount of costs were putting in, 
     Lesko said. ``Were lowering the amount of transportation for 
     things we need to pick up. Were letting the natural cycle do 
     its thing and kind of working alongside it. But for 
     Guerrero, its starting to plant the seeds for the next 
     generation. ``Its a great opportunity to have high school 
     students come out and share this with their friends and be 
     like `oh theres a farm here and we can all help together. I 
     really like that aspect of it, Guerrero said.
I rise today to recognize and 
celebrate a milestone moment for the Jewish community in southern

  On September 11, 2025, page E839, in the third column, the 
following appeared: Mr. LEE of Nevada. Mr. Speaker, I rise today 
to recognize and celebrate a milestone moment for the Jewish 
community in southern
  
  The online version has been corrected to read: Ms. LEE of 
Nevada. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to recognize and celebrate a 
milestone moment for the Jewish community in southern

 Nevada--the groundbreaking of the permanent home of Chabad Southwest 
  Las Vegas, which will take place on September 13, 2025.Founded under 
the leadership of Rabbi Levi Wilhelm and Mrs. Chayala Wilhelm, Chabad 
Southwest has become a vibrant center for Jewish life, learning, and 
community in the Southwest Las Vegas Valley.
  The new permanent home of Chabad Southwest Las Vegas will serve as a 
hub for worship, education, and fellowship. It will house weekly prayer 
services, holiday programs, adult and child education classes, Mommy &amp; 
Me programs, womens groups, after-school enrichment, and a wide 
variety of cultural and social gatherings. This expansion will allow 
Chabad Southwest Las Vegas to better serve families, individuals, and 
future generations, strengthening the fabric of the southern Nevada 
community.
  The groundbreaking marks not only a construction project but also the 
realization of a vision--``Building Our Future Together--that will 
ensure the Jewish community in the region has a spiritual, educational, 
and cultural home for decades to come.
  On this historic occasion, I ask my colleagues to join me in 
congratulating Rabbi Levi and Mrs. Chayala Wilhelm, the dedicated 
members of the Chabad Southwest Las Vegas community, and all those 
whose generosity and commitment have made this day possible. Their 
efforts stand as a testament to the enduring values of faith, family, 
and community that enrich our great state of Nevada and our Nation.
I rise today to welcome His All-Holiness 
Bartholomew to Washington, D.C.
  The Ecumenical Patriarch is the spiritual leader of over 300 million 
Orthodox Christians worldwide. Since 1991, he has served as the 
Archbishop of Constantinople--New Rome and Ecumenical Patriarch, a role 
that traces its lineage to the earliest days of Christianity. As the 
``first among equals among Orthodox Christian leaders, he has been a 
central figure in promoting unity within Orthodoxy, religious freedom 
globally, and constructive dialogue among faiths.
  Born on the island of Imvros, the Ecumenical Patriarch has spent his 
life in service to both faith and humanity. He is internationally 
recognized for his efforts to protect the environment--earning the 
nickname ``the Green Patriarch--as well as for his work in advancing 
human rights, reconciliation among faiths, and support for religious 
communities living under persecution.
  He has been welcomed by presidents and prime ministers around the 
world, addressed the European Parliament and the U.S. Congress, and was 
awarded the Congressional Gold Medal in 1997. In September 2025, he 
will return to the United States to receive the Templeton Prize--the 
worlds most distinguished award at the intersection of faith and 
science.
  This visit is especially meaningful to the many Greek Orthodox 
Americans in Massachusetts and in my district. From churches in Lynn, 
Peabody, and Salem, to communities across the Commonwealth, Greek 
Americans have contributed profoundly to the civic, cultural, and 
spiritual fabric of our state. The Ecumenical Patriarchs visit is a 
source of deep pride for many of my constituents and a reminder of the 
enduring connection between our country and the Ecumenical 
Patriarchate.
  Once again, I welcome Ecumenical Patriarch to Washington and in 
honoring his decades of global leadership, his commitment to peace and 
human dignity, and his enduring contributions to our shared moral and 
spiritual life.
I rise today to honor and welcome His All-
Holiness Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew to Washington, D.C. He serves 
as the spiritual leader and Primus inter Pares (First among Equals) of 
Orthodox Christianity worldwide, a Church of 300 million people.
  Later this month, His All-Holiness will visit the United States to 
receive the Templeton Prize, the worlds most prestigious international 
award at the intersection of religion and science. This honor is 
awarded annually to those who advance Sir John Templetons vision of 
progress in religion through discoveries and insights that deepen our 
understanding across faiths. Since being elected Ecumenical Patriarch, 
Bartholomew has been a courageous voice for unity, religious freedom, 
and environmental stewardship. His leadership has left a lasting mark 
on both the Orthodox world and the entire global community.
  This will not be his first visit to the United States. When he came 
in 1997, he was received in the Oval Office by President Bill Clinton 
and First Lady Hillary Clinton, who hosted a White House reception in 
his honor. He was also presented with the Congressional Gold Medal in 
the U.S. Capitol Rotunda by Speaker Newt Gingrich, a rare and 
distinguished honor. The State Department hosted him in the Ben 
Franklin Room, and Vice President Al Gore welcomed him at a breakfast 
at the Vice Presidents Residence.
  These visits remind us of the enduring spiritual and cultural bonds 
between the Ecumenical Patriarchate and the United States. As we 
prepare to welcome His All-Holiness once again, we recognize not just 
the leader of a faith, but a global advocate for justice, peace, and 
human dignity.
  On behalf of Virginias 7th District Greek Orthodox community, it is 
an honor to welcome him to Washington.