St. Louis and I rise to commemorate the 110th 
anniversary of the City of Richmond Heights, located in Missouris 
First District. Richmond Heights was incorporated on December 29, 1913 
with just 18 families residing in the area. Since then, the population 
has grown to 9,286.
  Richmond Heights has been home to many Missourians who brought the 
joys of art and music to St. Louis, such as jazz singer Mae Wheeler, 
rock-n-roll legend Chuck Berry, artist Ernest Trova, gospel singer 
Doris Fiddmont Frazier, architect Henry Hampton, and filmmaker Henry 
Hampton Jr. Moreover, Richmond Heights is home to many impactful social 
justice advocates such as Dr. Thomas E. Rusan, Jr., Georgia Tallier 
Rusan, and Rev. James E. Fiddmont. It is also home to one of the most 
recognizable voices in St. Louis, the legendary sports commentator, 
Jack Buck.
  Richmond Heights enriches Missouris First District with community 
institutions such as the Esquire Theater, Tropicana Lanes, SSM Health 
St. Marys Hospital, the Saint Louis Galleria, and the Boulevard. It 
includes four school districts: the Maplewood Richmond Heights School 
District, Clayton School District, Brentwood School District and Ladue 
School District, as well as Little Flower, Immaculata School, and the 
International Schoolhouse.
  As the Congresswoman for Missouris First District, I congratulate 
the residents of Richmond Heights and their current leadership, 
including Mayor Jim Thomson and Councilmembers Lisa Eppert, Greg 
Vescovo, Reginald Finney, Maurice Muia, Megan Moylan, Ashley Metcalf, 
Danny Hebenstreit and Scott Huston on 110 fruitful years. Heres to 110 
more.
I rise today to ask my colleagues to 
join me in congratulating Alexandra Volkalt on her victory in 
Missouris Class 3 Individual Cross-Country Championship.
  Alexandra claimed the Class 3 title to earn her second straight 
championship for Southern Boone High School. She stayed with the pack 
for most of the race until she pulled away near the end to finish first 
by two seconds. Alexandra should be commended for all her hard work 
throughout the past year and for bringing home another state 
championship to her school and community.
, please join me in recognizing Alexandra Volkart for a 
job well done.
I rise today to ask my colleagues to 
join me in congratulating Hanna Maschhoff on her victory in Missouris 
Class 2 Individual Golf State Championship.
  Hanna claimed the Class 2 individual title for the School of the 
Osage, making it her fourth time receiving all-state honors. Hanna shot 
a two-day total of 153 to hold off the second-place finisher by one 
stroke. She should be commended for all her hard work throughout the 
past year and for bringing home another state championship to her 
school and community.
, please join me in recognizing Hanna Maschhoff for a job 
well done.
CONGRATULATING ST. CHARLES WEST ON THEIR CLASS 3 GIRLS CROSS-COUNTRY 
                              of missouri
I rise today to ask my colleagues to 
join me in congratulating St. Charles West High School on their victory 
in Missouris Class 3 Girls Team Cross-Country Championship.
  By claiming the Class 3 title, the Warriors are now state champions 
for the second consecutive year. Every member of the team performed 
admirably, beating out their closest competition by nearly 100 points. 
The team should be commended for all their hard work throughout the 
past year and for bringing home a state championship to their school 
and community.
, please join me in recognizing the St. Charles West 
Girls Cross-Country Team for a job well done.
CONGRATULATING ST. DOMINIC GIRLS GOLF ON THEIR CLASS 3 STATE 
                              of missouri
I rise today to ask my colleagues to 
join me in congratulating the St. Dominic Girls Golf Team on their 
victory in Missouris Class 3 Team Girls Golf State Championship.
  The Crusaders claimed the Class 3 title by dominating their 
competition. By the end of the first day, the team held a 17-shot 
advantage and never looked back as they went on to win by 42 strokes. 
The team should be commended for all their hard work throughout the 
past year and for bringing home a state championship to their school 
and community.
, please join me in recognizing the St. Dominic Girls 
Golf Team for a job well done.
I rise today to honor a unique and important 
business, R.J. Corman Railroad Group, which is headquartered in 
Nicholasville, Kentucky. The company is celebrating its 50th 
anniversary in 2023.
  R.J. Corman Railroad Group was founded in 1973 in Central Kentucky by 
visionary entrepreneur and philanthropist Richard J. Corman with a 
single backhoe and a dump truck. The company now operates in 24 states 
and more than 70 locations throughout our nation. R.J. Corman Railroad 
Group employs more than 1,400 people, over 500 of which are based in 
the state of Kentucky.
  R.J. Corman Railroad Groups numerous services encompass railroad 
construction, short line railroad operations, industrial switching 
services, transloading operations, emergency response services, track 
material logistics, distribution centers, signal design and 
construction, and My Old Kentucky Dinner Train. The company serves six 
Class I freight railroads, many regional and short line railroads, as 
well as various rail-served industries. R.J. Corman Railroad Company 
operates three short line railroads serving multiple regions of the 
state contributing to the economic development of the corresponding 
communities. Through its dedicated employees, R.J. Corman Railroad 
Group strives to be the best-in-class service provider in the industry 
through its total commitment to customer satisfaction, increasing 
efficient operations while providing an ever-improving safe, and 
rewarding work environment.
  R.J. Corman Railroad Group is a highly respected Kentucky business. 
As the company celebrates its 50th anniversary, I congratulate all 
their employees and wish them a bright future. I am honored to 
recognize this company before the United States Congress.
I rise to honor the service of 
Saisha White, my legislative assistant who has dedicated her time to 
serving the people of Floridas 24th Congressional District.
  A Cleveland native, Saisha moved to Florida to obtain her law degree 
at Florida A&amp;M University after obtaining her bachelors at Miami 
University. Her time in law school inspired her passion to secure 
equity and opportunities across marginalized communities.
  Saisha came to my office ready to make a difference. She worked her 
way up to becoming my legislative assistant, handling my Transportation 
&amp; Infrastructure Committee work. In her time as my legislative 
assistant, she managed my proposed legislation, amendments--many of 
which were included in critical legislation and advocated for critical 
issues to better the lives of those across the country.
  Known for her dedication to giving back and empowering others, one of 
Saishas greatest attributes is her selflessness. Her willingness to 
continually give back is one of her many attributes that will 
inevitably result in success in this field.
  Saishas heart is dedicated to equity for Black and brown 
communities, and she is moving on from my office to continue that work. 
Upon transitioning from my office, Saisha will go on to advocate for 
safer communities, criminal justice reform, and civil rights access for 
marginalized communities.
  On behalf of Floridas 24th Congressional District, I ask my 
colleagues to join me in honoring Saisha White for her drive and 
dedication to public service.
I rise today to honor Senator Jim Perry for 
his great service to the state of North Carolina and to offer my best 
wishes as he enters the next chapter of his career.
  Earlier this month, Jim announced that he would not file for re-
election for the North Carolina Senate after serving three terms. Jim 
has served in the state senate since 2019, and in that time, did much 
to support his constituents of the 2nd district and the state as a 
whole. He is a staunch supporter of North Carolinas agricultural 
industry, rural communities as well as our military personnel. Whats 
more--Jim is a leader within the Senate itself, currently serving as 
Chairman of the Senate Finance Committee, and is a Member of the 
Committees on Commerce and Insurance Health Care, Redistricting and 
Elections and Rules and Operations of the Senate. In his time, hes 
served in leadership roles on numerous other Committees. Furthermore, 
he also serves as Majority Whip, to which he was elected unanimously 
during his first term in office.
  Jim is a born and bred son of North Carolina, great American and dear 
friend. Jims dedication to service and constant willingness to step up 
when needed is commendable and inspiring. It has been an honor serving 
the people of North Carolina alongside him and I wish him the best in 
all his future endeavors.
, please join me today in recognizing Senator Jim Perry 
for his service to our community and the great state of North Carolina.
I rise today to honor a legendary man, Billy 
Hicks. He was a renowned basketball coach at Scott County High School 
in Georgetown, Kentucky. He passed away on December 3, 2023.
  Coach Hicks was born in Harlan County, Kentucky on August 23, 1952, 
to a coal mining family. As a child, he dreamed of coaching as a way 
out of the mines. He played basketball at Evarts High School in Harlan 
County. Coach Hicks earned a scholarship to Wofford College, where he 
continued to play basketball and graduated in 1974. Billy Hicks coached 
basketball at Evarts High School, Harlan High School, and Corbin High 
School. He then was hired at Scott County High School, where he coached 
for 25 years. Coach Hicks retired in 2019 as the winningest coach in 
Kentucky basketball history, with 1,023 wins. His Scott County teams 
won two state championships, in 1998 and 2007. He was selected at the 
national level to coach the 2012 McDonalds All American basketball 
team. Coach Hicks was inducted into the Kentucky Basketball Hall of 
Fame. The Billy Hicks Classic, an annual basketball tournanrent in 
Scott County, is named in his honor. He touched thousands of lives all 
across the country and was highly regarded by all who knew him. Coach 
Hicks is survived by his wife Betsy, his daughter Ashley, son-in-law 
Jed Johnson, and grandson Wyler Nash Johnson. He was preceded in death 
by his son Tyler.
  Billy Hicks was well respected as a coach and as a man throughout the 
Commonwealth of Kentucky. I am honored to lift up his contributions to 
Kentucky before the United States Congress.
I rise today to honor Amie Fraley on being 
named Woman of the Year by the Moore County Community Foundation.
  A resident of Whispering Pines, Amie Fraley has headed Habitat for 
Humanity of the NC Sandhills since 2014. Through providing financial 
backing, volunteering and advocacy services, Habitat for Humanity of 
the NC Sandhills helps families gain the strength and stability needed 
to build better lives for themselves. Under her leadership, this 
organization engages in fundraising efforts to construct numerous homes 
and provide critical repairs to around 50 homes annually. Amie hopes, 
and expects, to reach 1,000 families helped in the coming year. Beyond 
her work with Habitat, Amie is an active member of the Southern Pines 
Rotary Club, Moore County Chamber of Commerce, as well as other 
community service focused groups.
  Amies dedication to the people of Moore County is without question. 
Her many years of service are both commendable and inspiring. I know I 
speak for everyone in our community when I say that we are grateful for 
all she has done to better the place we call home.
, please join me today in honoring Amie Fraley on being 
named Woman of the Year and to thank her for all she has done for the 
people of Moore County.
I am honored to recognize Deputy Chief Dennis 
J. Sorensen on the auspicious occasion of his retirement on January 10, 
2024, from the City of Harrisburg Bureau of Police after more than 31 
years of distinguished and tireless service.
  Dennis began his career on May 22, 1992. He was a member of the 53rd 
class of Harrisburg Area Community College Police Academy and graduated 
in September 1992.
  Serving the majority of his time in the 1st Platoon as a Patrol 
Officer on the midnight shift, then Patrol Officer Sorensen was 
promoted to Corporal in 2000. He earned his way to the Criminal 
Investigations Division, becoming the Adult Offender Supervisor from 
2000 to 2011. After earning promotion to Sergeant, he commanded the 
Special Operations Unit, and served with the Harrisburg Bureau of 
Police to assist in the Hurricane Katrina disaster. In 2011, Sergeant 
Sorensen was reassigned to the Uniformed Division, and served as the 
Officer in Charge of the 2nd Platoon. Through his outstanding work, 
shortly after his previous promotion, Sergeant Sorensen earned the rank 
of Lieutenant, and served as commander of the 1st Platoon until 2018. 
In 2020, he earned the rank of Captain, and commanded the Uniformed 
Patrol Division, and was honored with the position of Deputy Chief 
position in 2021.
  Along with his impressive law enforcement record, Deputy Chief Dennis 
Sorensen is a decorated Veteran of the United States Army, wherein he 
served honorably for 30 years, achieving the rank of Colonel. He earned 
his Bachelors degree and military commission from the California 
University of Pennsylvania, and served in myriad and vast leadership 
positions, deployments, and training schools; of particular note, 
earning the coveted status of Master Army Aviator. His military awards 
and decorations include: Army Meritorious Service Medal; Army 
Commendation Medal; Army Achievement Medal; Army Reserve Component 
Achievement Medal; National Defense Service Medal; Global War on 
Terrorism Service Medal; Kosovo Campaign Medal; Iraq Campaign Medal; 
Armed Forces Reserve Medal; Army Service Ribbon; Overseas Service 
Ribbon; NATO Medal; the Master Army Aviator Badge; the Pennsylvania 
Meritorious Service Ribbon; Pennsylvania Service Ribbon; Pennsylvania 
Twenty Year Service Medal; Pennsylvania General Thomas J. Stewart 
Medal; and the Pennsylvania Major General R. White Jr. Medal.
, I am honored and privileged to recognize Deputy Chief 
Dennis J. Sorensen on his well-earned retirement from the City 
Harrisburg Police Bureau. His tireless, faithful, and selfless service 
of more than 39 years to community, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, 
and the United States of America sets the standard by which we all 
should be judged.
I rise today to recognize Dr. Robert H. 
Bernard for his outstanding service and leadership as Board Chair for 
Operation Refuge, a grassroots organization based in Western Wayne 
County.
  Operation Refuge provides essential services like emergency food 
assistance and youth programming to some of the most underserved 
populations in Wayne County and whose mission is to serve the community 
with compassion, empathy, and integrity. As Board Chair, Dr. Bernard 
leads with this mission as his top priority. He has worked tirelessly 
to foster community development and promote career-driven and 
educational opportunities for the youth. Dr. Bernard has gone above and 
beyond to ensure that youth programs, such as Camp Inspire, are 
inviting and fulfilling and that youth scholarship funding is plentiful 
and available. Overall, Dr. Bernards leadership

and service at Operation Refuge has made a long-lasting, positive 
impact on the community. His care for the youth and people of this 
community is evident and overflowing.
  Please join me in acknowledging Dr. Robert H. Bernard for his 
passionate leadership and dedicated service to Operation Refuge and the 
community.
Mr, Speaker, I rise today to honor Stuart Mills on being 
named as the Man of the Year by the Moore County Community Foundation.
  Stuart Mills impact on Moore County is similarly robust and wide 
ranging. He has and continues to work in many important community 
leadership roles, including as Chairman of The Given Tufts Foundation, 
director of Pinehursts Village Heritage Foundation, as well as board 
Chairman and trustee of The ONeal School. Likewise, Governor Roy 
Cooper appointed Stuart to North Carolinas Financial Literacy Council 
last year. Stuarts most prominent community role is as Executive 
Director of Partners for Children and Families, a private nonprofit 
organization promoting early childhood development in Moore County.
  Stuarts dedication to the people of Moore County is without 
question. His many years of service are both commendable and inspiring. 
I know I speak for everyone in our community when I say that we are 
grateful for all he has done to improve the place we call home.
, please join me today in honoring Stuart Mills on being 
named Man of the Year and to thank him for all he has done for the 
people of Moore County.
I rise today to honor the life and work of 
Michael E. Fox, Sr., a strong force for good in the South Bay who died 
on November 3, 2023, at the age of 87.
  Michael Fox was born in Chicago on September 23, 1936 and attended 
Bishop Quarter Military Academy there, Campion Jesuit High School in 
Wisconsin, graduated from Notre Dame University in Indiana, and earned 
a degree in Brewing Science and Technology from the Siebel Institute of 
Technology in Chicago. He met his wife Mary Ellen in Illinois, and the 
couple moved to California. They bought a home in Saratoga in 1965 and 
acquired a small beer distributorship, which grew from 10 employees to 
more than 200 during 50 years of business.
  Michael Fox and Mary Ellen were renowned for their extraordinary 
philanthropy, and he held leadership roles in countless charitable

organizations. His good works earned him accolades such as Santa Clara 
County Philanthropist of the Year, two Papal awards, and an Honorary 
Degree of Doctor of Public Service from Santa Clara University.
  Mike Fox was deeply devoted to his family and his Catholic faith, and 
his commitment to both inspired his life and brought him great joy. He 
was kind and affable and mentored many people over the years, ran 
marathons and loved Broadway musicals. Any cause that would uplift 
others became his cause.
, I ask the entire House of Representatives to join me in 
honoring the life and work of Michael Fox, and in extending our most 
sincere condolences to his entire family. He was a good man who did 
great things to better our communities and strengthen our country. Mike 
Fox was a national treasure.