I rise today to celebrate 
the life of Kathleen Bailey who passed away surrounded by her loved 
ones earlier this month.
  Born and raised in Northwest Pennsylvania, Kathy was known throughout 
Oil City for her love and dedication to the region. She was a true 
advocate for Oil City, working hand-in-hand with local businesses for 
the betterment of the community. Those who knew Kathy could attest that 
her enthusiasm was infectious.
  Aside from her work in the community, Kathy was passionate about the 
arts. In her free time, she sang in the Barrow-Civic Theater and the 
Erie Philharmonic Choir. She also played the organ for St. Stephen 
Church and St. Joseph Church.
, scripture in Thessalonians 4: 13-18 instructs us with 
these words:
  ``Brothers and sisters, we do not want you to be uninformed about 
those who sleep in death, so that you do not grieve like the rest of 
mankind, who have no hope.
  Kathy lived to bring hope and optimism to so many in her community. 
Let us also count our blessings that we were fortunate enough to know 
Kathy Bailey. I send my sincere condolences to her husband, Scott, and 
their family during this difficult time.
I rise today to recognize Aaron Anderson for 
his efforts to better his community.
  In high school, Aaron was a dedicated member of the youth service 
club at Blaine High School. As a member of ``Bengals in Action, he 
spent countless hours volunteering at the North Anoka County Emergency 
food shelf. While volunteering, he noticed a problem with the procedure 
for taking orders. Luckily for Aaron, the solution lay in another area 
of his interest, technology.
  Aaron, with the help of his friend and fellow Eagle Scout, Andrew, 
created a software application to help track the food shelfs orders. 
The application immediately helped reduce confusion when taking orders 
and increased efficiency in sorting and packaging donations for 
distribution. Their application keeps records of past food shelf 
orders, family members, and dietary restrictions, which customers can 
reuse each time they come in.
  In fact, their program has allowed food and necessities to be 
delivered to clients in half the time.
  In recognition of their efforts, Aaron and Andrew were recently 
presented with the Congressional Award. The award represents the 
highest Congressional honor available for young Americans.
  Aaron and Andrew are true inspirations and examples of what it means 
to be a community servant. They are bright young men committed to 
making a difference in the world and I look forward to seeing all they 
accomplish in the years to come.
today I rise to recognize the 
heroic action of Senior Trooper Christopher Carlton with the Alabama 
Law Enforcement Agency.
  On February 17, 2023, at approximately 4:38 P.M., Senior Trooper 
Carlton responded to a vehicle crash on Highway 84 in Houston County, 
Alabama. Senior Trooper Carlton rescued Jessica Joy Thrasher of Lynn 
Haven, FL and 4-year-old Simon Thrasher, from the scene.
  Upon Trooper Carltons arrival, a member of Wicksburg Rescue advised 
Carlton that another ambulance would be required for both patients 
since they needed immediate medical attention. Without hesitation, 
Carlton transported Simon to Flowers Hospital in his patrol vehicle to 
ensure rapid treatment and care.
  Physicians, nurses, and hospital staff were able to stabilize Simon 
after the incident, and both Jessica and Simon are expected to make a 
full recovery.
  I am confident Trooper Carltons quick and selfless actions saved the 
lives of Jessica and Simon.

  I would like to thank Senior Trooper Christopher Carlton for his 
service. He serves the State of Alabama with integrity and always 
answers the call of duty. I extend my gratitude for his hard work and 
diligence in public service. The Second Congressional District of 
Alabama is blessed to have such an outstanding citizen.
I rise today to honor the life of service 
and sacrifice of United States Marine Corps veteran Corporal Donald A. 
Shields.
  Cpl. Shields was born in the town of Harpersfield, New York in 1932. 
After graduating high school, Cpl. Shields voluntarily enlisted into 
the United States Marine Corps on September 7, 1951 during the onset of 
the Korean Conflict. Cpl. Shields left his job as a dairy farmer to 
serve.
  After completing basic training, Cpl. Shields was deployed to Korea 
where he served selflessly and honorably. Cpl. Shields earned two 
Purple Hearts for his valor and sacrifice, along with the Korean War 
Service Medal, United Nations Service Medal, National Defense Service 
Medal, and, most notably, the South Korean Presidential Unit Citation 
for his service with the 7th Marine Regiment, 1st Marine Division in 
Korea.
  Following his 3 years of service in the Marines, Cpl. Shields was 
honorably discharged from active duty, although he continued to serve 
in the Marine Corps Reserve until 1959. Upon his return stateside, he 
found employment as a truck driver for Mobil Oil Corporation. Cpl. 
Shields moved his family to Castleton, New York and drove for Mobil for 
33 years before retiring.
  Donald always remained involved in his local community. He worked for 
the Town of Schodack as a building inspector and member of the Zoning 
and Planning Board. Donald was also a member of the Veterans of Foreign 
Wars Post 7337, a communicant of St Pauls Methodist Church, and a Boy 
Scouts Troop Leader. Donald was a proud family man, and enjoyed 
traveling with his wife, spending time with his grandchildren, and 
doing handyman work for his friends.
  Corporal Donald A. Shields record of service to his country and 
Rensselaer County is admirable, and it is my honor on behalf of New 
Yorks 21st Congressional District to recognize the commendable life 
and inspiring legacy of Corporal Shields.
I rise today to formally commend Dr. Robert 
Whitmore of New Bern, North Carolina for more than 40 years of service 
as a physician and his exemplary record of service. He has attended to 
our Eastern North Carolina community and our Nation honorably.
  His reputation and accolades for patient experience are a testament 
to the great care and expertise he has consistently provided throughout 
his career. As a urologist myself, I understand that providing top 
quality medical care is more than simply treating a disease but taking 
the time to listen to patient concerns and answering their questions. 
His standing in our community as a caring doctor, who personally 
follows up with patients, shows his commitment to the profession and 
his great character. Furthermore, his CarolinaEast Beacon of Service 
Award attests to his expertise and ability to touch the lives of so 
many others.
  I would be remiss if I failed to say thank you for Dr. Whitmores 
service to our Country as a staff urologist in the U.S. Army. Military 
doctors endure so much, and it takes a special person to do the job. 
.
, please join me in honoring this incredible physician for 
all he has done and continues to do for the people of Eastern North 
Carolina.
HONORING GREG AND CAROL KUPP UPON THE 90TH ANNIVERSARY OF KUPPYS DINER
Im honored to recognize Greg and Carol Kupp 
upon the auspicious occasion of the 90th Anniversary of ``Kuppys 
Diner on August 6, 2023.
  Kuppys is located in the heart of Middletown, Pennsylvania, and has 
remained a beloved landmark since Percy Kupp founded the establishment 
in 1933, during the Great Depression. Kuppys has been owned and 
operated by Fourth Generation Kupps (Greg and Carol) since 1991, with 
the Fifth Generation (Rachel) working alongside them daily, and even 
mentoring the Sixth Generation (Jackson) to take over someday. The Kupp 
Family is dedicated to continuing the tradition of their small, 
hometown, hardworking, friendly, and community-based establishment 
where all are welcome and treated like family.
  Kuppys Diner has enjoyed and earned extraordinary success, due in no 
small part to Percy Kuppys philosophy, ``if you serve good food at 
reasonable prices, people will be satisfied. But perhaps the most 
significant factor in Kuppys longevity, popularity, and legacy is the 
Kupp Familys tireless dedication to and appreciation of their 
customers and community for nearly a century.
, on behalf of the 10th Congressional District, and 
surrounding communities, Im honored and humbled to commemorate Greg, 
Carol, and the entire Kupp Family upon the 90th Anniversary of Kuppys 
Diner in Middletown, Pennsylvania. I wish them continued Gods 
blessings for all they have built, achieved, and contributed, not only 
to the communities of Central Pennsylvania, but to the United States of 
America.
I rise today to honor Mary K. Clark as she 
celebrated her 102nd birthday on August 9, 2023.
a World War II Navy 
Lieutenant. During the war, she worked on a triage group as an 
operating room nurse stationed in the Pacific Theater.

While serving in the Navy she met her loving husband, Edward L. Clark. 
The couple was married for 65 wonderful years. Ms. Clark now resides in 
Candler, North Carolina.
  It is my honor to recognize her today.
I rise today to honor the legacy of Joan 
Kaplan Davidson, a philanthropist and champion of conservation in New 
York State who recently passed away at the age of 96.
  Joan spent her life advocating for the restoration and conservation 
of New Yorks treasures and her legacy is one of vision and action. She 
served as the leader of the J.M. Kaplan Fund, as the New York State 
Commissioner of Parks, Recreation, and Historic Preservation, and gave 
her time to countless non-profit boards and committees. I had the 
pleasure of working alongside her to designate the Hudson River as New 
Yorks first Heritage River and to work to advance numerous local 
waterfront development plans and historic preservation projects. Joan 
chose to make a profound impact through the power of small, decisive 
actions, and her work has inspired me and countless others.
, I ask that my colleagues in the House join me in 
honoring the enduring legacy of Joan Kaplan Davidson, a woman who made 
a profound difference in the Hudson River Valley and New York State.
RECOGNIZING DALE HAMILTONS 60 YEARS OF SERVICE TO NORTH CONWAY
I rise today to congratulate Dale Hamilton 
on his retirement from the North Conway Fire Department after an 
impressive 60-year tenure as a firefighter. His position as the 
longest-serving member of the department speaks to his tireless 
dedication to maintaining the safety of the North Conway community, and 
his love for his work is an inspiration to those he serves with and 
those he strives to protect. His distinguished lifetime commitment to 
public safety is vital to keeping New Hampshire safe, and I commend his 
years of service to North Conway and the Granite State.
  A longtime resident of North Conway, Dale joined the North Conway 
Fire Department in 1963, and has remained a fixture in the department 
ever since. Dales experience in all positions, including operator of 
Engine 3, the ladder truck, and dispatcher, has made him an integral 
member of the North Conway Fire Department. Through his kind demeanor, 
dedicated work ethic, and his love of his craft, Dale has become a 
beloved and renowned member of the North Conway community. While we can 
never fully repay our debt of gratitude to Dale, we recognize his 
decades of service and immeasurable impact.
  On behalf of my constituents in New Hampshires First Congressional 
District, I want to congratulate Dale Hamilton on his well-deserved 
retirement and the work he has done to protect and serve the North 
Conway community. He will serve as a shining example for future North 
Conway firefighters, and I look forward to seeing what his next chapter 
holds. I wish him all the best in his future endeavors.
Mr NEAL. Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to 
acknowledge a landmark moment for the people of Springfield and the 
broader western Massachusetts community: the reopening of the Italian 
Consulate in Springfield, Massachusetts.
  The reestablishment of a consulate in our district is more than just 
a diplomatic gesture; it is a tangible commitment by the Italian 
government to enhance their services and accessibility throughout the 
U.S. For years, residents with ties to Italy--ties that span 
generations--have often had to embark on lengthy journeys to receive 
consular services. This investment ensures they no longer bear this 
burden, bringing critical services right to their doorstep.
  This consulate is a living testament to the rich tapestry of cultural 
and historical ties that bind the Greater Springfield Community with 
the Italian diaspora. The collaboration between the consulate and local 
schools to offer Italian-language programs exemplifies this deep 
connection, going back to the beginning of Springfields relationship 
with its sister city, Bracigliano, Italy. Furthermore, this consulate 
reinforces the essence of our shared stories, and serves as a beacon 
for younger generations to explore, understand, and appreciate the 
contributions and shared legacies of Italian-Americans in our district.
, I would like to extend my appreciation for the reopening 
of this consulate in Springfield. It stands as a testament to the 
shared heritage and enduring bonds forever connecting our two nations. 
The consulate is a welcome addition to the First District, and I 
anticipate many fruitful years of collaboration and growth ahead.
I rise to recognize the 
dedicated public service of Ms. Marie Mak, Director of Contracting and 
National Security Acquisitions at the Government Accountability Office 
(GAO), upon her retirement from Federal service. Ms. Mak has devoted 
over 36 years of service to the Federal Government, including at Naval 
Air Systems Command and the U.S. Coast Guard, before joining GAO in 
2002.
  Since entering the Senior Executive Service in 2014, Ms. Mak has 
skillfully led numerous GAO teams to conduct insightful analyses of 
acquisition programs and contracting processes within the Departments 
of Homeland Security and Defense, resulting in high quality reports for 
Congress. Her wide-ranging portfolio has also included assessing the 
Federal Governments response to hurricanes, wildfires, and other 
natural disasters, as well as the COVID-19 pandemic.
  Throughout her GAO career, Ms. Mak has taken a balanced, fact-based 
approach to reviewing Federal programs--a fundamental cornerstone of 
what Congress and the American public value about GAO. Drawing on her 
experience at the Coast Guard, where she helped develop strategic plans 
and performance measures, and allocate resources, she was able to 
understand the challenges that agencies often confront in their day-to-
day management efforts. She coupled that experience with a critical eye 
to recommended actions that agencies can take to improve their 
acquisition processes to deliver better, timelier, and more affordable 
systems used to execute their missions. She has testified before 
Congress several times on a variety of Coast Guard acquisition and 
disaster response contracting issues and delivered numerous briefings 
on key defense acquisition programs. As a result of Ms. Maks work, 
Congress is able to hold agencies accountable to first responders, 
warfighters, and the American public.
, 
including the Customer Service Award and John Henry Luke Mentoring 
Award. While Ms. Maks work has saved taxpayer dollars, she has also 
positively impacted the growth and development of the people with whom 
she works. Ms. Mak embodies GAOs people values of ensuring others are 
respected, valued, and treated fairly, and has served as a trusted 
mentor and advocate that invests her time in coaching and developing 
people. Her focus on staff development will benefit the next generation 
of GAO leaders to the advantage of Congress and taxpayers for years to 
come.
  I congratulate Ms. Mak on her well-deserved retirement and thank her 
for her distinguished service to Congress and the American public.
I rise today to reflect on the life and 
military service of Colonel Bobby Dill, who passed away on August 14, 
2023, at the age of 91.
  Colonel Dill was a native of Greenville County in South Carolina. He 
was a 1955 graduate of Clemson University and earned a masters degree 
from Oklahoma University. In the U.S. Army, he served in Korea, 
Vietnam, Germany and on Army Staff at the Pentagon.
  After retiring from military service, he spent several years 
investing in the next generation by working as a substitute teacher. 
Later, he would leave retirement to take on a new career as a 
newspaperman--working diligently to keep his community informed. With 
his wife LaVerle at his side, he wrote articles, attended countless 
meetings, and remained devoted to printing the truth.
, Colonel Bob Dills life was devoted to serving his 
country and his local community. Soloman tells us in the book of 
Proverbs that ``a good name is to be chosen rather than great riches. 
Colonel Bob Dill was a kind man who loved his country, and his memory 
will live on in the Third District of South Carolina.
I am honored to commend to the House the 
50th anniversary of the first concert of Ohio Wesleyan Universitys 
Gospel Lyres Choir.
  From its founding in October of 1972 by students Cheryl Smith and 
Marteal Pitts, the Gospel Lyres Choir provided a place for African 
American students at Ohio Wesleyan to gather in fellowship and 
friendship and to use their musical gifts to praise God. At its debut 
concert on campus on November 4, 1973, the Choir numbered an impressive 
22 members.
  Through the years, Choir members served as unofficial ambassadors of 
Ohio Wesleyan, performing at churches not just in the city of Delaware, 
Ohio, but across our great state and beyond. Its members formed strong, 
lifelong bonds as they touched countless lives with the Gospel message 
they shared through their music.
, Choir alumni will gather on campus during Ohio 
Wesleyans homecoming weekend this October for a reunion concert and 
celebration. On behalf of the people of Ohios Fourth Congressional 
District, I thank the members of the Gospel Lyres Choir for 
contributing so richly to the musical landscape of our great state. I 
wish them all the best as they mark their golden anniversary.
I rise today to pay tribute to a dedicated 
servant leader, good friend, and native son of South Carolina. South 
Carolina State Senator John L. Scott, Jr. transitioned from this life 
on August 13, 2023, in Charleston, South Carolina. His passionate work 
to improve access to education and health care will have profound 
implications for generations to come.
  Senator John L. Scott, Jr. was born on October 21, 1953, in Richland 
County, South Carolina, to the late John L. Scott, Sr. and Gracie W. 
Scott. Senator Scott graduated from C.A. Johnson High School in 
Columbia, South Carolina, and attended my alma mater, South Carolina 
State University, where he graduated in 1975 with a bachelors degree 
in accounting. He would go on to found J.L. Scott Realty Company, Inc., 
in 1981 and serve as owner and President of C&amp;S Consulting Group.
  I knew Senator Scott well through his transformational work in the 
state. From 1988 to 1990, he served as Vice Chair for Richland County 
Council. He was elected to the South Carolina House of Representatives 
in 1990, where he served until his election to the South Carolina State 
Senate in 2009. Throughout his nearly 33 years in elected office, 
Senator Scott sponsored legislation to promote access to education and 
affordable housing, improve career outcomes for HBCU students, and 
further rural equity. He was recognized with many awards and accolades 
throughout his service, from the Order of the Palmetto, South 
Carolinas highest civilian honor; to receiving the South Carolina 
National Guard Association Senator of the Year award; to receiving 
honorary Doctorates from various universities.
  His dedication to the betterment of the Palmetto State extended to 
our South Carolina Military Department, as Senator Scott commanded the 
Joint Services Detachment from February 18, 2017, to January 19, 2019. 
During that time, he actively recruited to increase enrollment, 
improved unit efficiency and readiness, and provided critical support 
for the Youth ChalleNGe Academy Program.
  Senator Scott was a man of faith and a longtime member of New 
Ebenezer Baptist Church in Columbia, South Carolina. He was an active 
participant in the church, serving as Church Clerk from 1980 to 1995, 
on the Trustee Board from 1980 to 2005, and as a Deacon from 2005 until 
his passing. He is lovingly remembered by his wife, Joan Crouch, son, 
John L. Scott, III, extended family, political colleagues, and the 
members of our shared brotherhood, Omega Psi Phi fraternity.
, I ask that you and our colleagues join me in recognizing 
the life and legacy of Senator John L. Scott, Jr. Senator Scott 
embodied the Biblical teaching to ``Be devoted to one another in love. 
Honor one another above yourselves, and as such devoted his life to 
improving the welfare of every South Carolinian. He will be sorely 
missed and well remembered.