I rise today to recognize the legendary 
career of New York Yankees broadcaster, John Sterling. A resident of 
Edgewater, New Jersey, John began announcing Yankee games on the radio 
in 1989. After a distinguished 35-year tenure with the Yankees, John 
recently announced his retirement.

  From 1989 to 2019, John Sterling did not miss a day of work, 
announcing a Ripken-esque 5,060 consecutive Yankee games. He announced 
every game Hall of Famer Derek Jeter ever played in. One-quarter of all 
games in the Yankees storied history. Sterlings incredible longevity 
and consistency are integral parts of his broadcasting brilliance.
  John Sterlings voice is one of the most memorable in the Big 
Leagues. His passion and love of the game of baseball could be heard in 
each game he announced. After a big Yankee strike out, run batted in, 
or play in the field, you could always expect to hear the contagious 
exhilaration in his voice. His announcement ``Theeeeeeeee Yankees 
Win! was a signature to decades of triumphs.
  John Sterling will also be remembered for the unique home run call he 
devised for every Yankee player. From ``Bernie goes Boom? and ``Its 
an A-Bomb for A-Rod! to ``Its a Thrilla from Godzilla! and 
``Robbie Cano, Dontcha Know! John never lacked creativity. To any 
Yankee fan among Americas millions, it was always exciting to hear 
Johns first home run call for a new free agent acquisition. He never 
disappointed.
  When you think of the Yankees, the first word that comes to mind is 
greatness. Twenty-seven World Series Championships. Forty American 
League pennants. The home of Babe Ruth, Mickey Mantle, Lou Gehrig, Yogi 
Berra, Joe DiMaggio, and Mariano Rivera. From 1996 to 2001, the Yankees 
had one of the most impressive stretches in Major League Baseball 
history, winning four world championships over the span of only five 
years. John Sterling was right there for this stretch, announcing their 
playoff games and World Series championships. A legendary franchise 
needed a legendary announcer like John Sterling.
  New York sports fans have been fortunate to listen to games announced 
by some of the greatest broadcasters ever. Mel Allen. Red Barber. Vin 
Scully. John Sterling joins that list. John Sterling will be remembered 
as one of the best sports broadcasters in history.
  The House sends its congratulations to John Sterling on a historic 
career and its warmest wishes for his retirement. May God Bless John 
Sterling. And God Bless America.
I rise to honor the distinguished career 
of President ReBecca (Becky) Koenig Roloff on the occasion of her 
retirement from St. Catherine University in Saint Paul, Minnesota. 
Since 2016, President Roloff has served as the 11th president of the 
university, which is affectionately known as St. Kates by students and 
alumni, which includes both her and me.
  During her eight years of distinguished leadership at St. Kates, one 
of the nations largest private womens universities, President Roloff 
has made a lasting impact by reaffirming the universitys accreditation 
through the Higher Learning Commission of the North Central Association 
of Colleges and Schools. She combined the Minneapolis and Saint Paul 
campuses into one unified campus in Saint Paul and completed numerous 
infrastructure improvements across campus. In 2022, it was a privilege 
to partner with her and the university to provide critical federal 
funding for technology and equipment upgrades for Mendel Hall to 
enhance student learning and research opportunities for women 
undergraduate students in STEM fields. She also successfully recruited 
a diverse senior leadership team and led the development of a new 10-
year strategic plan that has grown enrollment and strengthened its 
financial position.
  Prior to returning to her alma mater as president, Roloff 
distinguished herself in the business world as a senior vice president 
at American Express Financial Advisors, held leadership positions at 
Pillsbury Company, and was a grain merchant for Cargill. She has served 
on the boards of C.H. Robinson Worldwide, Inc., the Minneapolis 
Downtown Council Executive Committee, and Allina Health.
  The commitment to social justice and community service that was 
instilled in Becky as a student at St. Kates led her to serve in 
leadership of an organization with a social mission, becoming Chief 
Executive Officer of the Minneapolis YWCA from 2005 to 2016. During 
this time, the organization became the largest non-profit provider of 
high-quality, nationally accredited early childhood education in 
Minnesota. Upon the conclusion of her tenure, the board chair wrote: 
YWCA Minneapolis is tremendously grateful to Becky for her leadership 
over the last 11 years. She leaves a legacy of community impact, and a 
resilient, strong organization.
  In addition to earning her bachelors degree from St. Kates, where 
she graduated cum laude in 1976, Becky went on to earn a Master of 
Business Administration from Harvard Business School in 1982. 
Throughout her academic life and career, Becky has exemplified the St. 
Kates values of liberal arts education and its emphasis on 
intellectual curiosity and social justice. while working to empower 
women and make a difference in the world. As an alumna and as a Member 
of Congress, I celebrate her impressive career and wish to express my 
gratitude to Becky for her immeasurable contributions to St. Kates.
, please join me in this well-deserved tribute to Ms. 
ReBecca Koenig Roloff, the 11th President of St. Catherine University 
in Saint Paul, Minnesota.
it is my great privilege to 
serve on the Board of Trustees of the John C. Stennis Center for Public 
Service which, as part of its mission, seeks to encourage young people 
to careers in public service. Public Service Review, a quarterly 
publication produced by the Center, does just that. I would like to 
encourage anyone seeking hope for our nations future to read the 
recently released Fall 2023 edition of Public Service Review.
  In this issue you will find students reflections from their time 
serving on their college campuses and in their state and federal 
governments as well as interviews of public servant leaders. Featured 
students include Arielle Galinsky of Tufts University, Sam Guerrero of 
the University of Alabama, Rohini Achal of the University of 
Washington, Jacob Greenberg of the University of Vermont, Kennedy Guest 
of the University of Mississippi, Weiss OConnor of the U.S. Air Force 
Academy, Anusha Fathepure of the University of Oklahoma, and Avraham 
Spraragen of Georgetown University.
  The work of these students shows their passion for serving and their 
commitment to bettering our country. On behalf of my fellow Stennis 
Center Board of Trustees members, U.S. Senator Chris Coons, Mr. Tom 
Daffron, U.S. Representative Terri Sewell, and U.S. Senator Roger 
Wicker, I would like to congratulate the Stennis Center on a wonderful 
publication and encourage everyone to read Public Service Review Fall 
2023 at &lt;a href=http://www.stennis.gov.

&gt;www.stennis.gov.
I rise today to recognize Andre Gurule, 
Jr. for earning the Arvada Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth 
Award.
  Andre has overcome many challenges along his journey to success, 
demonstrating perseverance at every step. Students who strive to make 
the most of their education, like Andre, develop crucial skills and a 
work ethic that will guide them for the rest of their lives. This award 
is a testament to Andres hard work, determination, and perseverance at 
Jefferson Jr./Sr. High School and is clearly just the beginning of a 
bright and promising future.
  It is my honor to congratulate Andre Gurule, Jr. on achieving the 
Arvada Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth Award.
I rise today to recognize Brody Hafer for 
earning the Arvada Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth Award.
  Brody has overcome many challenges along his journey to success, 
demonstrating perseverance at every step. Students who strive to make 
the most of their education, like Brody, develop crucial skills and a 
work ethic that will guide them for the rest of their lives. This award 
is a testament to Brodys hard work, determination, and perseverance at 
Jefferson Jr./Sr. High School and is clearly just the beginning of a 
bright and promising future.
  It is my honor to congratulate Brody Hafer on achieving the Arvada 
Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth Award.
I rise today to recognize Jacki King for 
earning the Arvada Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth Award.
  Jacki has overcome many challenges along her journey to success, 
demonstrating perseverance at every step. Students who strive to make 
the most of their education, like Jacki, develop crucial skills and a 
work ethic that will guide them for the rest of their lives. This award 
is a testament to Jackis hard work, determination, and perseverance at 
Jefferson Jr./Sr. High School and is clearly just the beginning of a 
bright and promising future.
  It is my honor to congratulate Jacki King on achieving the Arvada 
Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth Award.
I rise today to recognize Jessica Lozano 
for earning the Arvada Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth Award.
  Jessica has overcome many challenges along her journey to success, 
demonstrating perseverance at every step. Students who strive to make 
the most of their education, like Jessica, develop crucial skills and a 
work ethic that will guide them for the rest of their lives. This award 
is a testament to Jessicas hard work, determination, and perseverance 
at Jefferson Jr./Sr. High School and is clearly just the beginning of a 
bright and promising future.
  It is my honor to congratulate Jessica Lozano on achieving the Arvada 
Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth Award.
I rise to recognize Hayward City Manager 
Kelly McAdoo Morariu as her 13-year tenure serving Hayward comes to an 
end this Friday, May 3. 2024.
  Kelly graduated from The University of Kansas, receiving a Bachelor 
of Arts in political science, economics, and international studies in 
1998, going on to receive her Masters in Public Administration in 
2000.
  Kelly joined the city of Hayward in 2010 as an Assistant City Manager 
and transitioned to City Manager in 2016. As chief executive, she 
worked to tackle issues of homelessness, financial stability, and 
infrastructure.
  Kelly effectively led city efforts to respond to the homelessness 
crisis by implementing compassionate city policies, declaring a 
homelessness emergency, and negotiating increased housing in the city. 
Under her leadership, the Hayward Navigation Center opened in 2018 
along with the Depot Community Apartments to help transition unhoused 
individuals to permanent housing. Kelly also helped negotiate 
agreements with the California Department of Transportation to 
repurpose land held for a freeway bypass for market-rate and affordable 
housing.
  As city manager, Kelly also helped maintain a financially stable city 
budget by paying down unfunded retirement liabilities and securing 
numerous grants at the state and federal levels for infrastructure, 
social services, and more. Haywards Measure C, passed in 2014, 
provided funding for a new Downtown Public Library, Heritage Plaza, 
retrofit city fire stations, and build a new Fire Training Center and 
Fire Station No. 6 in partnership with the Chabot-Las Positas Community 
College District.
  For 13 years, Kelly has diligently served the Hayward community. Her 
dedication to community engagement and collaboration has made her an 
asset at Hayward. I know that her presence will be deeply missed in 
Hayward. I wish her and her family success as she enters this new 
chapter as Santa Barbaras City Administrator.
I rise today to recognize Kenalynn 
Johnson for earning the Arvada Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for 
Youth Award.
  Kenalynn has overcome many challenges along her journey to success, 
demonstrating perseverance at every step. Students who strive to make 
the most of their education, like Kenalynn, develop crucial skills and 
a work ethic that will guide them for the rest of their lives. This 
award is a testament to Kenalynns hard work, determination, and 
perseverance at Jefferson Jr./Sr. High School and is clearly just the 
beginning of a bright and promising future.
  It is my honor to congratulate Kenalynn Johnson on achieving the 
Arvada Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth Award.
I rise today to recognize Kimberly De 
Leon for earning the Arvada Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth 
Award.
  Kimberly has overcome many challenges along her journey to success, 
demonstrating perseverance at every step. Students who strive to make 
the most of their education, like Kimberly, develop crucial skills and 
a work ethic that will guide them for the rest of their lives. This 
award is a testament to Kimberlys hard work, determination, and 
perseverance at Jefferson Jr./Sr. High School and is clearly just the 
beginning of a bright and promising future.
  It is my honor to congratulate Kimberly De Leon on achieving the 
Arvada Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth Award.
I rise today to recognize Matthew King 
for earning the Arvada Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth Award.
  Matthew has overcome many challenges along his journey to success, 
demonstrating perseverance at every step. Students who strive to make 
the most of their education, like Matthew, develop crucial skills and a 
work ethic that will guide them for the rest of their lives. This award 
is a testament to Matthews hard work, determination, and perseverance 
at Jefferson Jr./Sr. High School and is clearly just the beginning of a 
bright and promising future.
  It is my honor to congratulate Matthew King on achieving the Arvada 
Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth Award.
I rise today to recognize Montserrat 
Escalera Pulido for earning the Arvada Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors 
for Youth Award.
  Montserrat has overcome many challenges along her journey to success, 
demonstrating perseverance at every step. Students who strive to make 
the most of their education, like Montserrat, develop crucial skills 
and a work ethic that will guide them for the rest of their lives. This 
award is a testament to Montserrats hard work, determination, and 
perseverance at Jefferson Jr./Sr. High School and is clearly just the 
beginning of a bright and promising future.
  It is my honor to congratulate Montserrat Escalera Pulido on 
achieving the Arvada Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth Award.
I rise today to recognize Roman Figueroa 
Beltran for earning the Arvada Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for 
Youth Award.
  Roman has overcome many challenges along his journey to success, 
demonstrating perseverance at every step. Students who strive to make 
the most of their education, like Roman, develop crucial skills and a 
work ethic that will guide them for the rest of their lives. This award 
is a testament to Romans hard work, determination, and perseverance at 
Jefferson Jr./Sr. High School and is clearly just the beginning of a 
bright and promising future.
  It is my honor to congratulate Roman Figueroa Beltran on achieving 
the Arvada Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth Award.
it is my honor to congratulate French &amp; 
Parrello Associates on its 50th anniversary this year. A multi-
discipline engineering firm, French &amp; Parrello Associates has provided 
valuable contributions to the infrastructure of New Jersey since 1974.
  Founded by Laurence E. French, Argo T. Parrello, James B. Heller, and 
Joseph M. Edwards, French &amp; Parrello Associates has transformed from a 
branch office of Raamot Associates PC into the independent full-service 
engineering and consulting firm it is today. In its 50th year, French &amp; 
Parrello Associates (FPA) is headquartered in Wall, New Jersey and has 
three additional offices in New Jersey as well as offices in 
Pennsylvania, Atlanta, and New York. It is led by President and CEO 
Steven Tardy, PE and employs a staff of over 200.
  FPA has contributed to both private and public projects, offering a 
multitude of services encompassing construction, structural, 
geotechnical, telecommunications, and environmental engineering, bridge 
and highway design, surveying, and landscape architecture, among 
others. They have provided services for several projects across the 
Sixth Congressional District of New Jersey, including the South Amboy 
Ferry Terminal, the Senator Joseph M. Kyrillos Bridge, and the 
Beachfront North Condominiums in Long Branch.
, please join me in celebrating the 50th anniversary of 
French &amp; Parrello Associates. The company continues to deliver 
outstanding service to its clients and its innovation and commitment to 
excellence are truly deserving of this bodys recognition.