pro tempore, I rise to recognize the 
indefatigable work of Bo Shuff, who recently stepped down as Executive 
Director of DC Vote after seven years. At DC Vote, Bo helped lead the 
movement to make the District of Columbia the 51st state and to prevent 
Congress from interfering in D.C.s local affairs. I have worked 
closely with Bo on these efforts.
  During Bos tenure at DC Vote, the House of Representatives twice 
passed my bill, the Washington, D.C. Admission Act, that would make 
D.C. a state. Those are the only two times in history either chamber of 
Congress has passed the D.C. statehood bill.
  Bo has been involved in campaigns and advocacy since 2000, when he 
worked on behalf of then-Vice President Al Gore as part of the Florida 
Coordinate Campaign. In 2002, he worked on the statewide coordinated 
effort to re-elect then-U.S. Senator Tom Harkin and then-Governor and 
now-Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack. In 2003, Bo worked in more than 
30 states for the Human Rights Campaign to pass equality legislation 
and to elect candidates who supported LGBTQ rights.
  Bo has also worked for the Congressional Progressive Caucus, serving 
as Chief of Staff of its foundation, what is now the Progressive Caucus 
Center. In 2013, Bo became Campaign Manager for the mayoral campaign of 
now-D.C. Mayor Muriel Bowser. After that successful campaign, Bo became 
Executive Director of DC Vote.
  I ask the House of Representatives to join me in recognizing the 
important contributions of Bo Shuff to the District of Columbia and the 
Nation.
pro tempore, today I rise in celebration of 
the 125th anniversary of Flanner House.
  Located in Indianas 7th Congressional District, Flanner House was 
founded in 1903 as a community center for Indianapolis African-
American community. Today, the organization is central to the 
surrounding community, serving the whole family with programming like 
the Child Development Center, Center for Working Families, and an 
Elders Center. The organization has implemented innovative solutions to 
problems our community faces, including a Food Justice Initiative that 
led to the opening Cleos Bodega Grocery and Cafe, and Flanner Farms. 
These efforts provide healthy, affordable, and culturally appropriate 
produce to address food insecurity while employing young people and 
neighbors. Flanner House also continues to feed the soul by celebrating 
Black history, culture, and talent through the Ujamaa Bookstore and 
other community-strengthening programming featuring Black artists, 
scholars, and musicians.
  Today, I ask my colleagues to join me in extending our gratitude and 
best wishes to an organization that has created immeasurable change. 
Organizations like Flanner House care deeply about their community and 
the people they serve. I extend my heartfelt congratulations on this 
milestone anniversary and wish Flanner House many more years of 
success.
pro tempore, I rise today to honor Ms. 
Kristen Bennett for her invaluable work as a Congressional Intern 
serving in my Hendersonville office. I would like to take this 
opportunity to thank her for her hard work and recognize the meaningful 
contributions she made at the office this year.

  Interns work with staff to serve constituents in North Carolinas 
11th Congressional district. Kristen was chosen from a competitive pool 
of applicants and exceeded every expectation.
  It was a pleasure to work with Kristen, and I am proud to have such 
an intelligent and ambitious intern representing my office. Kristen 
exemplified the spirit of public service and represents the best that 
Western North Carolina has to offer. I congratulate her on the 
successful completion of her internship.
pro tempore, I rise today to recognize the 
contributions of Cheryl Sudduth as she is honored as one of 
Californias 8th Congressional Districts Women of the Year.
  Cheryl is involved with numerous organizations that aim to improve 
the status of marginalized people in her community. As a Senior 
Director for Goodwills AbilityOne program, she oversaw the building of 
thousands of fair housing units in Alameda County. Through this 
program, Cheryl also created programs that employ and train thousands 
of people who are traditionally excluded from the job market. Veterans, 
disabled individuals, formerly incarcerated people, and people 
returning to the workforce have benefitted from Cheryls work. She has 
also been involved with Alliance 4 Girls, a local program providing 
mentorship to young girls to give them a space to grow and thrive. 
Through this program and others, Cheryl has personally mentored 
hundreds of girls in her community. In addition, she has served on a 
variety of boards and commissions, including the West County Wastewater 
District, Contra Costa Racial Oversight Body, ACLU, and NAACP. She also 
gives her time to a variety of organizations, ranging from racial 
justice, education, the environment, public safety, and much more. She 
has received numerous awards and recognitions for her considerable 
contributions to the community at-large. Cheryls commitment to her 
community and improving all different aspects of public life serves as 
an inspiration to all who know her.
  On behalf of the people of Californias 8th Congressional District, 
it is my pleasure to honor and recognize Cheryl Sudduth for her 
positive contributions to our community.
pro tempore, I rise today to recognize the 
contributions of Claudia Jimenez as she is honored as one of 
Californias 8th Congressional Districts Women of the Year.
  Claudia has dedicated her life to serving the community of Richmond 
and is a current member of the Richmond City Council, serving the 6th 
District. As such, she is not only a proponent for positive social 
change but also a leader in her community. She has worked throughout 
her city to bring about transformative programs in areas such as 
affordable housing and homelessness. Claudia is known for forging 
alliances between key stakeholders across diverse communities. Her 
background as an immigrant from Colombia has helped shape her 
motivations as a community organizer. Trained as an architect in 
Colombia, she moved to Richmond in 2009, took English language classes, 
did volunteer work to practice her skills, and earned a Master of 
Environmental Planning from UC Berkeley. Claudia accomplished all this 
while caring for two children and still found time to lead campaigns 
and volunteer with other mothers in her neighborhood. Now as a Richmond 
City Councilmember, she is even more committed to improving the lives 
of those in her community and making Richmond one of the more 
affordable places to live in the Bay Area. Her commitment to her 
community and improving all different aspects of public life is an 
inspiration to all who know her.
  On behalf of the people of Californias 8th Congressional District, 
it is my pleasure to honor and recognize Claudia Jimenez for her 
positive contributions to our community.
pro tempore, I rise today to recognize the 
contributions of Courtney Tindall as she is honored as one of 
Californias 8th Congressional Districts Women of the Year.
  Courtney serves as a Senior Dependency Drug Court Case Manager for 
the Solano County Superior Court. In this role, she advocates for those 
who suffer from substance use disorder and has graduated hundreds of 
parents who have regained custody of their children. She is committed 
to helping those struggling with substance use disorder become sober 
and better their lives. Every day, she displays compassion and empathy 
as she advocates for children and families. Courtney has an unfailing 
commitment to her work and to reuniting families. She has received 
numerous awards for her work, including the Superior Court of 
California Customer Service Award, the California Bar Association Court 
Staff Award, the Child Abuse Prevention Council Henry Bergh Award for 
Practitioner of the Year, and Henry Bergh Award for Outstanding 
Contributions in the Dependency Drug Court and Support of Child Abuse 
Prevention, Intervention, and Treatment Efforts, The work Courtney does 
has touched the lives of countless vulnerable individuals and helped 
them make change for the better.
  On behalf of the people of Californias 8th Congressional District, 
it is my pleasure to honor and recognize Courtney Tindall for her 
positive contributions to our community.
pro tempore, I rise today to recognize the 
contributions of Debra Mason as she is honored as one of Californias 
8th Congressional Districts Women of the Year.
  Debra is the current Executive Director of the Bay Point Community 
Foundation and the Bay Point Municipal Advisory Council, where she has 
served for many years. Over the years, she has worked for after-school 
programs and served on the Mt. Diablo School Board, and today she 
continues to be a fierce advocate for students, parents, schools, and 
her community. She has pushed for public safety, nutrition assistance, 
after school education, and community engagement in schools. Continuing 
her work with education, she is also a California School Age Consortium 
Board Member. Her dedication, service, and work ethic has been an 
invaluable benefit to the local community. One example of a lasting 
impact that she has made on the community is establishing the Bay Point 
Branch of the Contra Costa County Public Library. Debra has been 
committed to addressing issues that she cares about and is always 
willing to take action and help others. Debra has been involved with 
countless community offices and committees where her leadership has 
improved our local schools and broader community.
  On behalf of the people of Californias 8th Congressional District, 
it is my pleasure to honor and recognize Debra Mason for her positive 
contributions to our community.
pro tempore, I rise today to recognize the 
contributions of Ebony Antoine as she is honored as one of Californias 
8th Congressional Districts Women of the Year.
  As a victim of gun violence herself, Ebony founded a nonprofit, 
Broken By Violence, to help families like hers heal after being 
impacted by gun violence. Broken By Violence has provided services to 
hundreds of families, including rental assistance, food assistance, 
emergency housing, mental health service referrals, and monthly healing 
spaces for survivors. She has worked with Solano Family Justice Center, 
the Vallejo Police Department, the City of Vallejo, and the Alameda 
County District Attorney to provide victims services and has also 
advocated for legislation that would better support survivors 
throughtout California.
  Although her life was irrevocably changed by tragedy, through her 
strength and determination, she became a beacon of hope for others. Her 
resilience and dedication to serving others is an inspiration to all 
who meet her. She truly embodies the values of a woman of courage by 
showing kindness, wisdom, humility, and compassion.
  On behalf of the people of Californias 8th Congressional District, 
it is my pleasure to honor and recognize Ebony Antoine for her positive 
contributions to our community.
pro tempore, I rise today to recognize the 
contributions of Judge Diana Becton as she is honored as one of 
Californias 8th Congressional Districts Women of the Year.
  Diana Becton has been Contra Costa Countys District Attorney since 
her 2017 swearing in. Diana is the first woman, first African American, 
and first woman of color to serve in the role since its creation in 
1850. This accomplishment alone shows the historical impact she has had 
on her community. For 22 years Diana, served as a judge in Contra Costa 
County where she was elected and became president of the National 
Association of Women Judges. She is known not only for upholding the 
law and holding people accountable, but also for striving to improve 
Contra Costa Countys judicial system by focusing on disrupting the 
school to prison pipeline, creating safe alternatives for low-level 
non-violent offenders, and addressing the mental health needs of our 
community. She created the Reimagine Youth Justice Task Force to create 
alternatives to juvenile hall for young offenders and has made efforts 
to curb racial bias in her department by partnering with the non-profit 
Vera Institute of Justice to evaluate her offices decision making.
  Dianas accomplishments in the judiciary are too enumerable and 
impressive to list briefly

as she is truly a pillar of her community and a testament to the 
excellence found in our district. Diana, far from doing business as 
usual, has aimed to fundamentally change many aspects of our often-
harsh criminal justice system to decrease bias and fulfill its duty to 
serve justice.
  On behalf of the people of Californias 8th Congressional District, 
it is my pleasure to honor and recognize Diana Becton for her positive 
contributions to our community.
pro tempore, I rise today to recognize the 
contributions of Mayor Catherine Moy as she is honored as one of 
Californias 8th Congressional Districts Women of the Year.
  Cat is a dedicated public servant who has offered years of service to 
her community. A Fairfield native, she stepped up to serve on the 
Fairfield City Council in 2008, following a career as a journalist. 
Cats work on the City Council, and current service as Mayor, have 
helped make life better for the residents of Fairfield, including 
through reducing gang violence and working to address homelessness. As 
a member of the National Conference of Mayors, Cat serves on a task 
force aimed at finding solutions to homelessness for populations in 
need across our county. In addition to her work as an elected official, 
Cat offers her own time in service to her community. She has been 
involved with countless organizations serving youth and those in need, 
including Girls of the Run, Boy Scouts, and local youth sports 
programs. Cat also makes a point of reaching out to those living in 
homeless encampments, helping them to find the support they need while 
working toward a more permanent solution. She is an impactful leader 
who has offered her time and resources in service to her community.
  On behalf of the people of Californias 8th Congressional District, 
it is my pleasure to honor and recognize Mayor Catherine Moy for her 
positive contributions to our community.
pro tempore, I rise today to recognize the 
contributions of Technical Sergeant Callie Aberin as she is honored as 
one of Californias 8th Congressional Districts Women of the Year.
  Callie enlisted in the United States Air Force in 2012 and now serves 
as a Technical Sergeant at Travis Air Force Base. She was selected as a 
Senior Instructor at the Air Mobility Commands largest Airman 
Leadership School, where she educates, mentors, and certifies front-
line supervisors on leadership skills, interpersonal skills, and 
behavioral theory. Her leadership in these positions have fortified 
strategic objectives in the personnel of Travis AFB. In addition to her 
official duties, Callie serves as the local Air Force Sergeants 
Association Chapter President, and advocates for improved quality of 
life and economic fairness for all military personnel. Under her 
leadership, this organization surpassed membership goals by 217 
percent. This community service has extended beyond Travis AFB and into 
the surrounding community where she has helped raise money for causes 
such as the Solano County Law Enforcement Torch Run and the Special 
Olympics. Callie was recognized as an NCO of the Year for the 60th Air 
Mobility Wing, Travis AFB Instructor of the Year in 2022, and ASFAs 
2023 International NCO of the Year. Callies dedication to her 
community and her country deserves recognition, as she goes above and 
beyond her official responsibilities to advocate for military 
personnel.
  On behalf of the people of Californias 8th Congressional District, 
it is my pleasure to honor and recognize Callie Aberin for her positive 
contributions to our community.
pro tempore, I rise today in 
honor of the life and legacy of Allison Elizabeth Kennedy, a devoted 
mother, beloved wife, cherished daughter, and follower of Christ.
  Allison is remembered by those who knew her best as a woman with a 
servants heart; the first to volunteer, the first to help, the first 
to pick up the phone. Throughout her life, Allison graciously shared 
the love and joy obtained through a deep and abiding faith with those 
around her. No one who met her was ever surprised to find that she was 
a woman of faith; she exuded her love for God in all that she did.
  Born in California and raised in Vancouver, Washington, Allison grew 
up around a large

extended family that instilled the values of selflessness, generosity, 
and integrity in her from a young age. Even as Allison grew older, she 
stayed deeply connected to her roots. Her devotion to family only came 
second to her devotion to God.
  Allisons mind was as strong and capable as her heart. Growing up, 
she consistently excelled in her studies. Her success in cheerleading 
and high school mock trial reflected her competitive spirit and 
relentless commitment to excellence. Allison went on to graduate from 
Washington State University with distinction. Her academic journey did 
not end there. She later earned a masters in public policy from 
American University in Washington D.C. where she developed an 
appreciation for our nations capital. It was also here that she found 
a worthy mission--serving the public through road safety advocacy.
  Allison proved to be a determined policy advocate who labored to 
improve safety conditions for drivers and pedestrians across our great 
nation. Allisons career began when she was hired at the Advocates for 
Highway and Auto Safety where she ultimately became Director of 
Government Relations, promoting safer transportation policies. Her 
efforts will live on through the policies she fought tirelessly for and 
that made it into landmark pieces of legislation like the 
Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act. Allisons service will continue 
to impact the lives of children, teen drivers, pedestrians. and 
motorists in America.
  While in Washington D.C., Allison found new meaning and solace in her 
Roman Catholic faith. Allison became known for always being the first 
to volunteer or to welcome new faces into the Church. In particular, 
she enjoyed serving at the Our Lady of Bethesda Retreat Center, where 
she helped prepare young couples to embark on the blessing of marriage. 
Washington is also where Allison met her devoted husband, Brian. 
Allison and Brian were engaged in December 2014 and married in November 
2015.
  Allison was an unwavering support to Brian and a devoted mother to 
her two sons: Christopher and Callahan. After five years of trying to 
start a family, she and Brian were blessed with the gift of Christopher 
through adoption. In 2022, they were granted another blessing when 
Allison discovered she was pregnant with her second son. Callahan was 
born in January 2023. Throughout the years of waiting to live her dream 
of becoming a mother, Allison found strength and resolve from leaning 
on the Lords perfect plan and timing. As scripture teaches us in 2 
Peter 3:9, ``The Lord is not slow to fulfill his promise as some count 
slowness, but is patient toward you, not wishing that any should 
perish, but that all should reach repentance. Allisons final days on 
this side of heaven were spent joyfully caring for her two children 
alongside Brian.
  Allison will be greatly missed by her loved ones. It is a privilege 
to recognize her life and to celebrate the blessings God granted her. 
Her memory and impact on her family, community, and country will live 
on for generations to come. She may be gone from this earth, but her 
legacy will live on, especially in the lives of her two beloved sons.
pro tempore, I rise today to recognize Fire 
Chief Joseph M. Cluchey on his over 42 years of service to the Illinois 
fire community as he begins his well-deserved retirement.
-call firefighter in the South Elgin Fire 
Department and worked as a contract paramedic in the St. Charles Fire 
Department in 1981 before becoming a career firefighter. He worked hard 
and made his way up the ranks to become fire chief for the South Elgin 
and Countryside Fire Protection District. He valiantly served in this 
capacity for 12 years before suffering an injury from a roof collapse, 
which caused him to retire from South Elgin in 2014.
  After his retirement from South Elgin, he took on a leadership role 
as the statewide operations chief for Mutual Aid Box Alarm System. In 
that capacity, Chief Cluchey served countless communities statewide 
through the organizations non-discriminatory mutual aid response 
system for fire, EMS, and specialized incident operational teams.
  In November of 2016, after a nationwide search Mr. Joseph M. Cluchey 
was sworn in as Fire Chief of the Elburn &amp; Countryside Fire Protection 
District. The district currently operates out of three stations which 
serve all or portions of ten communities including 2 large subdivisions 
located in the 11th Congressional district of Illinois.
, I am proud to represent the community of 
Elburn, Illinois and I ask my colleagues to join me in recognizing Fire 
Chief Joseph M. Cluchey for his over 42 years of dedication and fire 
service to the community and wish him a happy retirement.
pro tempore, I rise today to recognize the 
Wasco Womans Club on their 100-year anniversary and to thank them for 
their significant contributions to the Wasco community. Founded in 
1923, the Wasco Womans Club was started by 13 young women who joined 
together to improve Wasco through volunteer service. Their unwavering 
commitment to public service has guided their mission over the past 
century. The Wasco Womans Club now has approximately 40 members, many 
of whom are active in other non-profits and faith-based organizations 
in the community. The club is passionate about the well-being of the 
citys residents and focuses many of their efforts on strengthening 
local schools, libraries, and youth programs.
  For a century, the Wasco Womans Club has offered a chance for women 
of all ages to come together and give back to the Central Valley 
community. The club is a strong supporter of the Ronald McDonald House 
and Toys for Tigers organization, helping children and their families 
get through incredibly difficult situations. Additionally, the club 
hosts regular events for those in the community, including the Wasco 
High School Student Art and Photography Awards and the Christmas with 
Santa Event for special needs students. The club is also the proud 
owner of the oldest adobe building in the city, which they use to host 
special events and community gatherings. Amid all of their work, the 
members of the Wasco Womans Club are committed to uplifting each other 
through their long-standing friendships and shared commitment to the 
betterment of the community.
, I ask all my colleagues in the House of 
Representatives to join me in celebrating the Wasco Womans Club on 
their 100-year anniversary. Their work to enrich the community of Wasco 
will be felt for generations to come.