today I pay tribute to a dedicated public 
servant and community leader who has been a constant voice and a 
steadfast advocate for the city of Lansing, Michigan, for decades. 
Carol Hallman Wood was first elected to Lansings City Council in

1999, but has been involved in neighborhood and community issues her 
entire life. As she now steps back from elected office, I offer my deep 
gratitude for all she has done to make Lansing a better, stronger 
place.
  Carol was just a toddler when her parents and two siblings moved 
across the country from Colorado to Michigan. They settled in Lansing 
and quickly instilled in their children the notion that there was 
nothing more important than being part of a community and helping the 
people in it. A proud product of Lansing Public Schools, Carol attended 
Michigan Avenue Elementary School, Genesee Street Elementary School, 
West Junior High School, and graduated from J. W. Sexton High School. 
After high school she made a big move to Anchorage, Alaska, where she 
worked for the states public school library system, but returned to 
Michigan following the death of her sister in a plane crash. This would 
unfortunately not be the only time Carol and her family experienced 
profound tragedy.
  Upon her return to Lansing, Carol picked up where she left off, 
working alongside her mother, Ruth Hallman, to build up the community. 
The two were so close Carol eventually moved right next door, living in 
the very same neighborhood where she grew up. In partnership with 
community groups, the two spearheaded the effort to change the citys 
housing code, turning rentals back into ownership opportunities for low 
to moderate-income residents, They also worked with local law 
enforcement to implement team policing, and in collaboration with 
Neighborhood Watch and the Genesee Neighborhood Association, brought 
the number of homes in the community with documented drug activity down 
from a high of 137 in 1988 to just 6 today.
  But the neighborhood that made Carol who she is also brought her 
greatest pain, when her beloved mother was brutally attacked in her 
home in July of 2007, and died a few days later of her injuries. 
Devastated but unbroken, Carol refused to let this horrific incident 
drive her from her home, and instead redoubled her efforts to fight for 
her community, an angel no doubt fighting right alongside her.
  Six times the voters returned Carol to the Lansing City Council, and 
during her nearly quarter-century tenure she has chaired every 
committee and held virtually every position, including Council 
President on five occasions. She continues to give back to the 
community by serving on various boards and commissions, and as 
executive director of Retired &amp; Senior Volunteer Programs of Ingham, 
Eaton, and Clinton Counties. She is the proud mother of two sons, and a 
grandmother to four.
  Carol personifies the ideals of service, and has shown us all the 
power and true definition of living in community. I thank her for her 
extraordinary devotion to Lansing.
HONORING MR. OLAJUWON WHITE, FL-03S 2023 VETERAN OF THE YEAR
on behalf of Floridas Third Congressional 
District, we honor Mr. Olajuwon White as the 2023 Veteran of the Year.
, Florida. In this role he works to help veterans with casework 
related to compensation, pension, dependency compensation, burial 
benefits, educational assistance, and more. In 2023, Mr. White received 
the 2023 Greater Gainesville Chamber of Commerces Veteran Impact 
Award, the National Association of Counties Achievement Award, and a 
Levy County Certificate of Appreciation.
a Hospital Corpsman in the United 
States Navy certified as an independent duty corpsman and surgical 
technician. Following his military service, Mr. White worked with 
Alachua County as a Senior Veterans Claims Counselor, working with 
hundreds of veterans to file claims and lead educational sessions for 
veterans and their dependents on information from the Department of 
Veterans Affairs. He also has experience working with the VA as a field 
examiner in Tampa.
  We thank Mr. White for his service and sacrifices for our nation and 
hope that his spirit of service will continue for many years to come. 
We are thrilled to honor him as our 2023 Veteran of the Year.
I rise today to recognize Officer Mark 
Frost, upon his retirement on December 1, 2023 for 27 years of 
dedicated service to the people of the State of California as a 
California Highway Patrol (CHP) Officer.
  Officer Frost began his journey in law enforcement in Sacramento at 
the California Highway Patrol Academy on December 2, 1996, and 
successfully graduated on June 6, 1997. Following his graduation, he 
was assigned as a California Highway Patrol Officer to the CHP Hayward 
Office.
  He later transferred to the Merced Office on October 1, 2001, where 
he served in various roles such as the union representative in the 
California Association of Highway Patrolmen (CAHP) for the CHP Merced 
Area, and as the CAHP District 3 Defense Representative.
  Additionally, Officer Frost was certified as an Emergency Medical 
Responder (EMR) and served as a CPR instructor. His expertise also 
extended to firearm safety as the Weapons Range Safety Officer.
  Showcasing his attention to detail and commitment to maintaining the 
integrity of the law enforcement process, he served as the Evidence 
Officer for the CHP Merced Office. His leadership qualities were 
further recognized as he assumed the responsibilities of Officer in 
Charge (OIC) and Acting CHP Sergeant for the Merced Area.
  Officer Mark Frost exemplifies the highest standards of duty and 
commitment to public service with his 27-year career as a California 
Highway Patrolman. Every day, he tirelessly strived to serve the people 
of the State of California, earning the admiration of myself and his 
local community in the Central Valley.
I introduce the District of Columbia Chief 
Financial Officer Act, which would give the District of Columbia the 
authority to increase the pay of its Chief Financial Officer (CFO). The 
D.C. CFO is a local D.C. official and is paid with local D.C funds. 
D.C. should have the authority to set the pay of all its employees. 
Last Congress, the House Committee on Oversight and Accountability 
passed this bill.
  Under the D.C. Home Rule Act, Congress established a maximum rate of 
pay of the CFO, and the D.C. Council has no authority to increase that 
rate. Congress does not cap, or otherwise establish, the pay of any 
other D.C. employee. Under this bill, the CFO would be paid at the 
greater of a rate equal to the current maximum rate of pay or a rate 
established in law by D.C.
  D.C. requested that I introduce this bill to enable it to retain and 
recruit the best CFOs. The D.C. CFO was established by Congress in 
1995. Congress vested the CFO with extraordinary powers and designed 
the CFO to be independent of the D.C. Mayor and Council. D.C. cannot 
obligate or expend funds without the CFOs approval. The CFO manages an 
approximately $20 billion budget that consists of state, county and 
city functions, and the CFO has more than 1,700 employees. The CFO may 
be removed only for cause by the Mayor, subject to the approval of two-
thirds of the Council and a 30-day congressional review and comment 
period. This bill would help maintain the independence of the CFO by 
establishing a permanent floor on the CFOs pay and by prohibiting the 
Council from reducing the CFOs pay during the CFOs term.
  Although the D.C. CFO is the most powerful non-elected official in 
D.C., more than 20 D.C. employees are paid more than the CFO. D.C. must 
compete with both the private and public sectors for high-quality CFOs, 
and there are many private- and public-sector CFOs who are paid more 
than the D.C. CFO.
  This bill is critical to the financial operations of D.C. and is an 
important step to increase home-rule authority for D.C. I urge my 
colleagues to support this bill.
I rise to express my opposition to 
S.J. Res. 32. [the Provision on Congressional Disapproval of The Rule 
Submitted By The Bureau Of Consumer Financial Protection Relating To 
``Small Business Lending Under The Equal Credit Opportunity Act.
, the beginning of so many great American stories is built 
around starting a small business in your family name, becoming a 
foundation in your local community--making it in America.
  Small businesses are major drivers of wealth creation in our overall 
economy. They account for two-thirds of net new jobs and nearly half of 
our U.S. economic activity.
  For many of them, that dream stalls with going to a bank and getting 
a small business loan. For many Americans, the sound of their name, the 
color of their skin, the language that they speak or who they love can 
doom that dream if a bank says that they are at risk.
  This isnt hypothetical. I, too, was born and raised in south Texas, 
I can tell you that when I go home and I see some businesses that have 
closed, I ask my family whether it was due to the pandemic, or no 
demand for the

cost of services that they had. I am told that they just had trouble 
with finances, and they couldnt get a loan.
  In some small rural areas, like where I grew up, there arent credit 
unions everywhere like there are in the city of Houston where I live 
now.
  Even in the city of Houston, many small businesses during the 
to go in and do a carve-out to literally force the banks to provide 
loans to small businesses.
  I am glad that one of my colleagues was openhearted and gave people a 
lot of loans. I just hope that that included loans to minority small 
businesses.
, this is real. It is not hypothetical. We know that 
minority-owned small businesses were less likely to receive a loan 
during the pandemic compared to White firms. Regrettably, Mr. Speaker, 
racism and discrimination flourish in the darkness. We need to shine a 
light and allow the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau to make 
lending more transparent.
, a transparent market will be a competitive market.
  With transparency in lending, banks are driven to compete and offer 
better terms.
  With this resolution, extreme MAGA Republicans are protecting the 
secret discriminatory practices of big banks and lenders. Repealing 
this rule would harm all those who stand to benefit from much-needed 
transparency.
  Make no mistake, extreme MAGA Republicans continue to put the 
interests of the big bank CEOs and corporate lobbyists ahead of their 
constituents. It is they who, time and time again, put profits over 
people. House Democrats will continue protecting everyday consumers and 
small business owners, while holding corporations accountable.
  We will always put people over corporate profits. We will always put 
light over darkness.
  For additional information on an April 19, 2022 Report from the 
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau titled ``Data Spotlight: 
Challenges in Rural Banking Access. Please see (&lt;a href=https://
files.consumerfinance.gov/f/documents/cfpb&gt;https://
files.consumerfinance.gov/f/documents/cfpb&lt;/a&gt; data-spotlight challenges-
in-rural-banking 2022-04.pdf).
  I include in the Record an April 4, 2021 New York Times article by 
Stacy Cowley titled ``Minority Entrepreneurs Struggled to Get Small-
Business Relief Loans. (&lt;a href=https://www.nytimes.com/2021/04/04/business/
ppp-loans-minority-businesses.html&gt;https://www.nytimes.com/2021/04/04/business/
ppp-loans-minority-businesses.html&lt;/a&gt;).
, I urge my colleagues to vote against this resolution.

       A year after the Paycheck Protection Program started, 
     studies show how its design hurt Black- and other minority-
     owned businesses.
       Southern Bancorp is a lender serving the Arkansas and 
     Mississippi Delta, where poverty rates are among the highest 
     in America and decades of redlining shaped neighborhoods with 
     little generational wealth.
       When the Paycheck Protection Program for small businesses 
     started last April, so many of Southern Bancorps customers 
     didnt qualify for the relief money that the Arkansas banks 
     chief executive, Darrin Williams, turned to donors to raise 
     money for $1,000 grants so it wouldnt have to turn 
     applicants away empty-handed.
       The bank made 128 such grants, giving more than 100 of them 
     to businesses run by women or minority owners. One let a nail 
     salon owner buy plexiglass so she could reopen. Another 
     allowed a small cafe to buy safety gear for its staff. A day 
     care used the money for the new sanitizing equipment it 
     needed.
       ``So many companies will never come back, and 
     disproportionately more of those that will be lost are Black 
     and brown businesses, Mr. Williams said.
       Congress created the Paycheck Protection Program in March 
     2020 as an emergency stopgap for what lawmakers expected to 
     be a few months of sharp economic disruption. But as the 
     pandemic raged on, the program--which made its first loans 
     one year ago this past week--has turned into the largest 
     small-business support program in American history, sending 
     $734 billion in forgivable loans to struggling companies.
       The program helped nearly seven million businesses retain 
     workers. But it has also been plagued by complex, changing 
     rules at every stage of its existence. And one year in, it 
     has become clear that the programs hasty rollout and design 
     hurt some of the most vulnerable businesses.
       A New York Times analysis of data from several sources--
     including the Small Business Administration, which is 
     managing the loan program--and interviews with dozens of 
     small businesses and bankers show that Black- and other 
     minority-owned businesses were disproportionately underserved 
     by the relief effort, often because they lacked the 
     connections to get access to the aid or were rejected because 
     of the programs rules.

       After Congress created the program in last years CARES 
     Act, President Donald J. Trumps administration--especially 
     his Treasury secretary, Steven Mnuchin--put a priority on 
     getting money to needy businesses fast. Just seven days after 
     the law was signed, the earliest applicants received their 
     checks.
       But the haste meant the rules were mostly written on the 
     fly. Reaching harder-to-serve businesses was an afterthought. 
     Lenders and advocacy groups warned that the relief effort had 
     structural challenges that were likely to inadvertently but 
     disproportionately harm women and minority business owners. 
     Reaching the most vulnerable businesses required 
     determination, they said, and the program gave lenders no 
     incentives to put in that effort.
       The government relied on banks to make the loans, creating 
     an obstacle for borrowers who didnt have established banking 
     relationships. Some banks favored their larger and wealthier 
     clients, which pushed ordinary customers to the back of the 
     queue. ``Mystery shopper studies found that Black 
     applicants were consistently treated worse than white 
     counterparts.
       The program also largely locked out sole proprietors and 
     independent contractors--two of the most popular structures 
     for minority-owned businesses. Those companies werent 
     eligible to apply for the programs first week. When they got 
     access, a rule barring loans to unprofitable solo 
     businesses--a restriction that didnt apply to larger 
     companies--prevented many from getting help. Most nonbank 
     lenders, including those that specialize in underserved 
     communities, were shut out for weeks while they waited for 
     the Small Business Administration to approve them.
       ``The focus at the outset was on speed, and it came at the 
     expense of equity, said Ashley Harrington, the federal 
     advocacy director at the Center for Responsible Lending.
       In the programs final weeks--it is scheduled to stop 
     taking applications on May 31--President Bidens 
     administration has tried to alter its trajectory with rule 
     changes intended to funnel more money toward women- and 
     minority-led businesses, especially those with only a handful 
     of employees.
a swipe at his predecessors track record 
     last week as he signed a bill extending the programs 
     deadline. ``Many small businesses, as you know, particularly 
     Hispanic as well as African-American small businesses, are 
     just out of business because they got bypassed the first time 
     around, the president said.
       But Mr. Bidens revisions--which, most prominently, 
     expanded lending to independent contractors and others who 
     work for themselves--have run into their own obstacles, 
     including the speed with which they were rushed through. 
     Lenders, caught off guard, struggled to carry them out, with 
     little time left before the deadline.
       ``The rules are complicated and constantly changing, and 
     that alone creates an access barrier, Randell Leach, the 
     chief executive of Beneficial State Bank in Oakland, Calif.

       Because lenders are not required to collect demographic 
     details on their borrowers, data on the Paycheck Protection 
     Programs racial breakdown has been scarce, but economists 
     have consistently found signs of gaps.
       An analysis by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York noted 
     that some counties with large numbers of Black-owned 
     businesses--most notably the Bronx, Queens and Wayne County, 
     Mich., which includes Detroit--had strikingly low 
     concentrations of the relief loans. Majority-white ZIP codes 
     in several metropolitan areas had higher loan coverage than 
     ZIP codes with heavily minority populations, according to a 
     San Francisco Fed analysis released last month.
       And data from the Small Business Administration shows the 
     relief efforts tilt. The vast majority of lenders did not 
     report demographic data on the 3.6 million loans they made 
     this year, but of the 996,000 that included information on 
     the borrowers race, 71 percent of the dollars went to white-
     owned businesses.
       Pilar Guzman Zavala founded Half Moon Empanadas, a small 
     chain of restaurants, in Florida 12 years ago. She employed 
     100 people before the pandemic and had established bank 
     accounts and years of detailed business records. But Ms. 
     Zavalas application stalled at the first two lenders she 
     tried, forcing her to spend a month hunting before she 
     finally found a local bank that would process her loan.
       Shes grateful for the aid, which helped her hold on to 50 
     workers, but found the process infuriating.
       ``The financial system doesnt get to truly small business, 
     Hispanic businesses, women-owned businesses. It just 
     doesnt, she said.
       Of the 1,300 Paycheck Protection Program loans that 
     Southern Bancorp made last year, many went to customers who 
     had been turned away by larger banks, Mr. Williams said.
       In a recent Federal Reserve survey, nearly 80 percent of 
     small-business owners who are Black or of Asian descent said 
     their companies were in weak financial shape, compared with 
     54 percent of white business owners. And Black owners face 
     unique challenges. While owners from all other demographics 
     told the Fed that their main problem at the moment was low 
     customer demand, Black respondents cited a different top 
     challenge: access to credit.
       When Jenell Ross, who runs an auto dealership in Ohio, 
     sought a Paycheck Protection Program loan, her longtime bank 
     told

     her to look elsewhere--a message that large banks like Bank 
     of America, Citi, JPMorgan Chase and Wells Fargo delivered to 
     many of their customers in the programs frenzied early days.
       Days later, she obtained a loan from Huntington Bank, a 
     regional lender, but the experience stung.
       ``Historically, access to capital has been the leading 
     concern of women- and minority-owned businesses to survive, 
     and during this pandemic it has been no different, Ms. 
     Ross, who is Black, told a House committee last year.

       Community lenders and aid organizations took a shoe-leather 
     approach to filling the gaps.
       Last year, the American Business Immigration Coalition, an 
     advocacy group, worked with local nonprofits to create a 
     ``community navigator program that sent outreach workers to 
     Black, minority and rural businesses in Florida, Illinois, 
     South Carolina and Texas. They plowed through roadblocks, 
     Whac-a-Mole-style.
       Language barriers were common. Many business owners had 
     never sought a bank loan before. Several didnt have an email 
     address and needed help creating one. Some hadnt filed 
     taxes; the coalition hired two accountants to help people 
     sort out their financials.
       ``Our folks literally went door to door and walked people 
     through the process, said Rebecca Shi, the groups 
     executive director. ``Its time-consuming.
       The groups work netted $8 million in Paycheck Protection 
     Program loans for 219 businesses. For those companies, the 
     help made a profound difference.
       TruFund Financial, a New York lender that focuses on 
     historically disadvantaged communities, spent two hours of 
     staff time, on average, on each of the 490 loans it made last 
     year--far more than larger lenders put in. Dozens of its 
     applications took 10 hours or more to complete, said James H. 
     Bason, TruFunds chief executive.
       Many of TruFunds customers walked in the door after being 
     turned away by large banks, where ``not being able to speak 
     to anybody at the bank, sitting around waiting to hear, and 
     then not hearing anything for weeks--all of that created a 
     lot of anxiety for our small-business borrowers, Mr. Bason 
     said.
       Shaundell Newsome, a Las Vegas business owner and a co-
     chair of Small Business for Americas Future, an advocacy 
     group, said improving outcomes for Black business owners 
     would require deliberate, sustained changes throughout the 
     banking industry.
       ``The solution is intentionality, he said. ``What I mean 
     by that is making sure bankers, regulators and policymakers 
     stay intentional on building Black businesses and helping us 
     get access to capital.
       Thats a message Mr. Newsome passed on to Treasury 
     Secretary Janet L. Yellen in a recent meeting. Ms. Yellen has 
     pledged to increase support for minority-focused lenders and 
     make other changes to alter a financial system that, in her 
     words, still produces outcomes unacceptably similar to those 
     of the days when Jim Crow laws were in effect.
       Economic crises like the one now gripping the country ``hit 
     people of color harder and longer and intensify economic 
     inequality, Ms. Yellen said at that meeting. ``I am worried 
     the current crisis will do this again. In fact, I know it 
     will, unless we act.
today I take a moment to recognize Army 
Captain Kirk R. Proctor, Jr., an exceptional Officer, leader and public 
servant.
  Cpt. Proctor has concluded a year as a member of my legislative team, 
and within this duration, he has made a real impact on a multitude of 
defense, national security, and foreign affairs policy initiatives.
  His on-the-ground perspective bolstered by my teams analysis--from 
how the industrial base ties into the operational force, to explaining 
the evolution of military medicine, and how readiness initiatives 
intersect with military family quality of life. Furthermore, Cpt. 
Proctor has inspired colleagues to learn more about the defense 
industry through his application of institutional knowledge and hard-
earned experiences.
  Cpt. Proctors unwavering dedication to my office and contributions 
to Congress have not gone unnoticed. His commitment to the American 
people and passion for public service is admirable, and I hope he is 
offered the most unique opportunities and enriching assignments as he 
continues his career as an Army Officer. I wish Cpt. Proctor and his 
wife Sabia the best of luck as he begins his next assignment as a 
legislative liaison, and I look forward to seeing him lead in the years 
to come.
  On behalf of the U.S. Congress and a grateful Nation, I extend my 
deepest appreciation to Captain Kirk R. Proctor, Jr., and I 
congratulate him as he continues a career of public service within the 
U.S. Army and to our Nation.
it is my honor to recognize Mr. William 
``Bill Shepler for his years of service to the Mackinaw City 
community and retirement as President of the Icebreaker Mackinaw 
Maritime Museum Board of Directors.
  Following the attack on Pearl Harbor in 1941, our country assumed 
heavy demands on the war materials industry. In order to sustain these 
increased production needs, the United States Coast Guard icebreaker, 
Cutter Mackinaw WAGB-83, was authorized for construction on December 
17, 1941. Until decommissioning, The Mackinaw proved to be an essential 
facet of the Great Lakes economy, colloquially becoming known as ``The 
Queen of the Great Lakes. The Mackinaw was essential to the 
maintenance of the shipping lanes of the Lakes, becoming responsible 
for over 100 trapped ships being freed from ice blockages or buildups.
  Following a long and successful career, the ship began its 
decommissioning process and the City of Cheboygan attempted to find a 
suitable home for The Mackinaw. In August of 2004, Mr. Shepler, along 
with Dick Moehl and Sandy Planisek, founded the Icebreaker Mackinaw 
Maritime Museum in order to keep the ship in the Great Lakes. Following 
its successful development, the renowned icebreaker was decommissioned 
on July 10, 2006, and was moored at its permanent berth on July 21, 
2006. With gratitude to the IMMM board of directors under the direction 
of Bill Shepler, the Icebreaker Mackinaw Maritime Museum welcomed its 
first visitors in the spring of 2007. Visitors can now explore the 
ships 62-year history, making their way around the Mess Deck, Engine 
Room, Captains Quarters, Sick Bay, Galley, Navigation Room and more.
, it is my honor to recognize the dedicated efforts of Mr. 
Bill Shepler in preserving our history, and I congratulate him on a 
well-deserved retirement. Id like to wish Bill and the IMMM all the 
best in their future endeavors.
I include in the Record the following 
remarks by the Honorable Ventris C. Gibson.
       Good Afternoon. It is a pleasure to be here to introduce 
     the designs for the 2024 Greatest Generation Commemorative 
     Coin Program. Every day, across the Nation, the Mint connects 
     Americans through coins. Next year, it will be our great 
     privilege to connect America to the service and sacrifice of 
     American soldiers and civilians during the Second World War.
       The National World War II Memorial stands as an important 
     symbol of Americas national unity, a timeless reminder of 
     the moral strength and power that flows when free people are 
     at once united and bonded together in a common and just cause 
     for liberty. This is the first national memorial dedicated to 
     all who served during World War II and acknowledges the 
     commitment and achievement of the entire Nation. It honors 
     the more than 16 million who served in the Armed Forces of 
     the United States, the more than 400,000 who died, and the 
     millions who supported the war effort from home. Their legacy 
     is part of our American story.
       Since the Mints establishment in 1792, the women and men 
     of our workforce have taken great pride in rendering the 
     story of our nation through enduring examples of numismatic 
     art.
       As the largest mint in the world, the United States Mint 
     produces the coinage required by our Nation to conduct its 
     trade and commerce. In addition, Congress authorizes a 
     maximum of two commemorative coin programs annually to 
     celebrate and honor American people, places, events, and 
     institutions. I would like to thank Senator Browne, 
     Representative McHenry and Representative Waters for their 
     work to get the Greatest Generation out of their respective 
     committees and working with the sponsors, leadership and Mint 
     to ensure the language was correct and passed in time for 
     2024.
       Since the beginning of the modern commemorative coin 
     program in 1982, the United States Mint has raised more than 
     $522 million in surcharges authorized to help build or 
     enhance new museums, preserve historical sites, and support 
     important national programs. In accordance with legislation, 
     the Mint includes a surcharge as part of the price of each 
     commemorative coin. These surcharges are authorized to be 
     turned over to the sponsoring organizations for projects that 
     benefit the community. In this case, surcharges are 
     authorized to be awarded to the Friends of the National World 
     War II Memorial to support the National Park Service in 
     maintaining and repairing the memorial, and for educational 
     and commemorative programs.
       Id like to tell you a little about the designs. The gold 
     obverse, designed by Artistic Infusion Program Designer Heidi 
     Wastweet and sculpted by United States Mint Medallic Artist 
     Eric Custer, depicts the Wall of Stars at the World War II 
     Memorial with an olive branch. The inscriptions are 
     ``LIBERTY, ``IN GOD WE TRUST, ``2024, and ``WORLD WAR 
     II MEMORIAL.
       Designed by Artistic Infusion Program Designer Ben Sowards 
     and sculpted by United States Mint Chief Engraver Joe Menna, 
     the gold reverse depicts a folded flag with the inscriptions 
     ``UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, ``E PLURIBUS UNUM, ``WWII 
     MEMORIAL, ``TO UNITE THE GENERATIONS OF TOMORROW, and 
     ``FIVE DOLLARS.
       The silver obverse, designed by Artistic Infusion Program 
     Designer Beth Zaiken and sculpted by United States MIne 
     Medallic Artist Phebe Hemphill, features an allegorical 
     tableau of figures supporting a globe. Each figure represents 
     a branch of the U.S. Armed Forces during WWII (Air Force, 
     Coast Guard, Navy, Army, and Marine Corps) plus a figure 
     representing the critical work of the Merchant Marine. The 
     inscriptions are ``1941-1945, ``WORLD WAR II MEMORIAL, 
     ``DEFENDERS OF FREEDOM, ``LIBERTY, ``IN GOD WE TRUST, 
     and ``2024.
       Designed by Artistic Infusion Program Designer Ben Sowards 
     and sculpted by United States Mint Medallic Artist Renata 
     Gordon, the silver reverse design depicts a view from beneath 
     a baldacchino, a sculptural canopy, inside a victory pavilion 
     in the World War II Memorial featuring four eagles holding a 
     laurel wreath. Inside the wreath is a globe centered on the 
     Pacific Ocean. The inscriptions are ``UNITED STATES OF 
     AMERICA, ``E PLURIBUS UNUM, ``VICTORY, ``IN THE AIR, 
     ``AT SEA, ``ON LAND, ``WWII MEMORIAL, and ``ONE 
     DOLLAR.

       The half dollar obverse, designed by Artistic Infusion 
     Program Designer Elana Hagler and sculpted by United States 
     Mint Medallic Artist Craig Campbell, features a reimagining 
     of the figure of Liberation on the World War II Victory 
     medal, awarded to all who served in the Armed Forces during 
     the War. The inscriptions are ``LIBERTY, ``IN GOD WE 
     TRUST, ``WORLD WAR II ``2024, and ``WE ANSWERED THE 
     CALL.
  The half dollar reverse, designed by Artistic Infusion Program 
Designer Matt Swaim and sculpted by United States Mint Medallic Artist 
John McGraw, depicts the World War II Memorial from the point of view 
of a person walking up a ramp leading to one of the towers. The 
inscriptions are ``UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, ``E PLURIBUS UNUM, and 
``HALF DOLLAR.
  The Greatest Generation commemorative coin designs are emblematic of 
the National World War II Memorial and the service and sacrifice of 
American soldiers and civilians during World War II. We hope this 
program will honor their courage and their spirit. It is our pleasure 
to assist the Friends of the National World War II Memorial in their 
efforts to teach the lessons of yesterday to unite the generations of 
tomorrow.
       Thank you all very much.
I am thrilled to co-sponsor the 
``Renewable Fuel for Ocean-Going Vessels Act (H.R. 6681), with 
Representatives Mariannette Miller-Meeks (R-IA01), Nikki Budzinski (D-
IL13), and Carlos A. Gimenez (R-FL28). This bipartisan bill would make 
maritime biofuel fully eligible under the U.S. Environmental Protection 
Agencys (USEPA) Renewable Fuel Standard, which currently only applies 
to biofuels for motor vehicles, airplanes, locomotives and, in limited 
circumstances, recreational boating or vessels on inland waterways.
  Under the Energy Policy Act of 2005 (Public Law 109-58), Congress 
authorized the federal Renewable Fuel Standard (RFS), which works to 
simultaneously reduce transportation-related emissions from fossil 
fuels and support domestic agriculture, forestry, and biofuels 
manufacturing. However, current law excludes otherwise eligible 
biofuels for ocean-going vessels. No rationale was ever provided for 
this exclusion in the Congressional hearing record or Committee reports 
for the 2005 and 2007 Energy Bills.
  This arbitrary, counterproductive exclusion denies the burgeoning 
advanced biofuels and renewable natural gas industries in the United 
States important maritime customers. Our bipartisan bill would fix this 
problem by simply striking the exclusion, allowing domestic biofuels 
producers to obtain an RFS credit for selling to customers in the Jones 
Act and global maritime industries. The United States Navy has even 
sought to use renewable maritime fuels but has so far been stymied as 
domestic blenders simply do not make renewable maritime fuel because of 
this unnecessary exclusion.
  To be clear, although modern engines for large vessels are 
increasingly capable of burning advanced biofuels instead of heavy 
bunker fossil fuels, our bipartisan bill would not require the use of 
renewable fuel in all ocean-going vessels. Instead, our bill would 
merely expand the potential market for biofuels and remove a statutory 
disincentive for developing renewable maritime fuels.
  According to the USEPAs Inventory of U.S. Greenhouse Gas Emissions 
and Sinks from 1990 to 2021, the transportation sector accounted for 
approximately 29 percent of greenhouse gas emissions nationally, the 
largest of any economic sector. Tackling the climate crisis requires 
every industry to transition to cleaner, renewable fuels including the 
international ocean shipping and cruise industries. In July 2023, the 
United Nations International Maritime Organization (IMO) adopted new 
global standards to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from commercial 
cargo vessels and cruise ships. Our bipartisan ``Renewable Fuel for 
Ocean-Going Vessels Act (H.R. 6681) would support the global maritime 
industrys transition to alternative fuels like advanced biofuels and 
renewable natural gas from methane capture.
, the federal Renewable Fuel Standards exclusion of fuel 
for ocean-going vessels, without any stated rationale, has created 
unnecessary regulatory complexity, hindered the advanced biofuel and 
renewable natural gas industries, and undermined the global effort to 
reduce maritime emissions. I encourage all Members of Congress to join 
me in removing this outdated restriction by cosponsoring our bipartisan 
the ``Renewable Fuel for Ocean-Going Vessels Act (H.R. 6681).
SALUTING THE SERVICE OF CAPTAIN HOWARD McKINNEY, U.S. ARMY, RETIRED
I am proud to honor Captain Howard 
McKinney, U.S. Army, Retired, with a Congressional Veteran 
Commendation. His excellent service to both the Army and our nation is 
a shining example of citizenship and commitment to duty.
  During his service, CPT McKinney served in Georgia, Louisiana, and 
Vietnam where, as a Captain Infantry Platoon Leader, he led soldiers 
directly into combat during several enemy engagements. His 
accomplishments did not go unnoticed with his many awards including a 
Silver Star, Purple Heart, and an Army Commendation Medal.
  CPT McKinney returned to Texas after his dedicated years of service. 
With the extensive experience he acquired with his work with automated 
tax systems, he started his own business, McKinney E-Systems &amp; 
Associates, Inc. in Austin. Since retirement from the U.S. Army, he has 
devoted his time, talents, and resources to family, church, community, 
and veteran organizations.
  I join CPT Howard McKinneys family, friends, and colleagues in 
acknowledging his selflessness. His fearless support and devotion to 
service before himself makes him a worthy recipient of a Congressional 
Veteran Commendation.
I am honored to recognize the 
extraordinary career of Colonel Robert R. Gosney, U.S. Army, Retired. 
Throughout his life, he has dedicated himself to his country, fellow 
warriors, and neighbors. I am proud to present him with the 
Congressional Veteran Commendation.
  During his years of service in the U.S. Army, he went above and 
beyond to serve his country. COL Gosney was a master of many 
assignments and responsibilities during two tours in Vietnam (where he 
served alongside his brother), including various field artillery, army 
aviation assignments, and commanding the 25th Infantry Division 
Aviation Battalion. COL Gosney also served as Chief of the U.S. 
Military Mission in Monrovia, Liberia.
  His commitment to service didnt end when he left the military as he 
remains active in numerous community organizations. COL Gosney was a 
member of the Temple Founder Lions Club for 38 years, serving his 
neighbors by identifying and responding to the needs of the community 
as their main goal. He also is a valued member of the Christ the King 
Catholic Church and Knights of Columbus in Belton, TX. Hes made 
lasting and indelible contributions that make Central Texas a place 
were all glad to call home.
  COL Gosneys life tells the story of a man unafraid to contribute 
both his time and energy to the defense of our nation and the 
betterment of his community. His devotion to service before self 
reflects the best of the generous American spirit.
it is my privilege to present a 
Congressional Veteran Commendation to First Lieutenant Debbie Ann Nash-
King, U.S. Army, Retired. Her life and career reflect hard work, 
activism, and dedication to whats best for her nation and Central 
Texas.
  After being commissioned as a Second Lieutenant in the United States 
Army, she attended the Medical Services Corp Officers course and 
completed her military tour as the Fort Hood Dental Clinics company 
commander. Her contributions didnt go unnoticed as she earned various 
commendations including the Army Achievement Medal, National Defense 
Service Medal, and the Joint Meritorious Unit Award.
  1LT Nash-Kings commitment to service didnt end when she stepped 
away from the military. Shes tirelessly supported her community by 
volunteering and serving on a broad array of important organizations 
and groups throughout the region, committing her talents and energies 
to make the Lone Star State a great place to call home. Currently, she 
serves as the Mayor of Killeen. Texas and has made lasting 
contributions to the city that is home to Fort Cavazos. She has been a 
shining example of citizenship and commitment to duty in every step of 
her life.
  I commend 1LT Nash-Kings selfless service to the United States Army, 
her nation, and her community. Her patriotism, citizenship, and 
commitment to others reflect the traits that make both our state and 
Nation great. I join her friends and family in celebrating her 
outstanding achievements.
Title IV of Senate Resolution 4, agreed to by the Senate of February 
4, 1977, calls for establishment of a system for a computerized 
schedule of all meetings and hearings of Senate committees, 
subcommittees, joint committees, and committees of conference. This 
title requires all such committees to notify the Office of the Senate 
Daily Digest--designated by the Rules Committee--of the time, place and 
purpose of the meetings, when scheduled and any cancellations or 
changes in the meetings as they occur.
  As an additional procedure along with the computerization of this 
information, the Office of the Senate Daily Digest will prepare this 
information for printing in the Extensions of Remarks section of the 
Congressional Record on Monday and Wednesday of each week.
  Meetings scheduled for Tuesday, December 12, 2023 may be found in the 
Daily Digest of todays Record.

     10 a.m.
       Committee on the Judiciary
         To hold hearings to examine pending nominations.
                                                            SD-226
     2:30 p.m.
       Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation
       Subcommittee on Space and Science
         To hold hearings to examine government promotion of 
           safety and innovation in the new space economy.
                                                            SR-253
       Select Committee on Intelligence
         To receive a closed briefing on certain intelligence 
           matters.
                                                            SH-219
     3 p.m.
       Committee on the Judiciary
       Subcommittee on Competition Policy, Antitrust, and Consumer 
           Rights
         To hold hearings to examine the impact of algorithms on 
           competition and consumer rights.
                                                            SD-226

     9 a.m.
       Committee on Energy and Natural Resources
         Business meeting to consider subcommittee assignments for 
           the 118th Congress, S. 461, to make certain irrigation 
           districts eligible for Pick-Sloan Missouri Basin 
           Program pumping power, S. 594, to require the Secretary 
           of Agriculture and the Secretary of the Interior to 
           prioritize the completion of the Continental Divide 
           National Scenic Trail, S. 636, to establish the Dolores 
           River National Conservation Area and the Dolores River 
           Special Management Area in the State of Colorado, to 
           protect private water rights in the State, S. 1118, to 
           establish the Open Access Evapotranspiration (OpenET) 
           Data Program, S. 1254, to designate and expand 
           wilderness areas in Olympic National Forest in the 
           State of Washington, and to designate certain rivers in 
           Olympic National Forest and Olympic National Park as 
           wild and scenic rivers, S. 1348, to redesignate land 
           within certain wilderness study areas in the State of 
           Wyoming, S. 1521, to amend the Federal Power Act to 
           modernize and improve the licensing of non-Federal 
           hydropower projects, S. 1634, to provide for the 
           designation of certain wilderness areas, recreation 
           management areas, and conservation areas in the State 
           of Colorado, S. 1662, to direct the Secretary of the 
           Interior to convey to the Midvale Irrigation District 
           the Pilot Butte Power Plant in the State of Wyoming, S. 
           1776, to provide for the protection of and investment 
           in certain Federal land in the State of California, S. 
           1889, to provide for the recognition of certain Alaska 
           Native communities and the settlement of certain claims 
           under the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act, S. 1890, 
           to provide for the establishment of a grazing 
           management program on Federal land in Malheur County, 
           Oregon, S. 1955, to amend the Central Utah Project 
           Completion Act to authorize expenditures for the 
           conduct of certain water conservation measures in the 
           Great Salt Lake basin, S. 2160, to amend the Omnibus 
           Public Land Management Act of 2009 to authorize certain 
           extraordinary operation and maintenance work for urban 
           canals of concern, S. 2169, to authorize the Secretary 
           of the Interior to carry out watershed pilots, S. 2247, 
           to reauthorize the Bureau of Reclamation to provide 
           cost-shared funding to implement the endangered and 
           threatened fish recovery programs for the Upper 
           Colorado and San Juan River Basins, S. 2581, to extend 
           the Secure Rural Schools and Community Self-
           Determination Act of 2000, S. 2615, to amend the Alaska 
           Native Claims Settlement Act to provide that Village 
           Corporations shall not be required to convey land in 
           trust to the State of Alaska for the establishment of 
           Municipal Corporations, S. 3033, to withdraw certain 
           Federal land in the Pecos Watershed area of the State 
           of New Mexico from mineral entry, S. 3036, to require 
           the Secretary of the Interior to convey to the State of 
           Utah certain Federal land under the administrative 
           jurisdiction of the Bureau of Land Management within 
           the boundaries of Camp Williams, Utah, S. 3044, to 
           redesignate the Mount Evans Wilderness as the ``Mount 
           Blue Sky Wilderness, S. 3045, to provide for the 
           transfer of administrative jurisdiction over certain 
           Federal land in the State of California, and S. 3046, 
           to make permanent the authority to collect Shasta-
           Trinity National Forest marina fees.
                                                            SD-366
     9:30 a.m.
       Special Committee on Aging
         To hold hearings to examine substance use trends among 
           older adults.
                                                            SD-106
     10 a.m.
       Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions
         To hold hearings to examine the diabetes epidemic.
                                                            SD-430
       Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
         To hold hearings to examine the Cyber Safety Review 
           Board, focusing on expectations, outcomes, and enduring 
           questions.
                                                            SD-562

     1 p.m.
       Committee on the Judiciary
       Subcommittee on Human Rights and the Law
         To hold hearings to examine protecting the human rights 
           of foster children.
                                                            SD-226