.R. 5894, 
the Labor, Health and Human Services, Education and Related Agencies 
Appropriations Act. The bill before us today is unprecedented in many 
unfortunate ways. This bill makes devastating cuts across some of our 
most vital government agencies; it decimates education spending, 
abandons low-income workers and college students, stifles medical 
innovation, and harms womens health.
  This bill was pulled from consideration on the House Floor because 
Republicans do not have the support within their own Conference to pass 
this legislation. It is another example in a long line of 
Appropriations failures by House Republican leadership, where there has 
been no effort to find middle ground and find a bipartisan path 
forward.
  Let me begin with House Republicans unilateral decision to skip the 
full committee markup for this bill and for the Commerce, Justice, 
Science Appropriations Act. House Democrats were denied the opportunity 
to debate, amend, and mark up H.R. 5894 in committee. This bill is so 
deeply unpopular that Republican appropriators did not want to go on 
the record in committee in support of its deep cuts to our nations 
education, workforce development, and public health funding.
  Not only have House Republicans deviated from the longstanding 
committee process, but they have taken the unheard-of step of adding 
partisan riders to the bill and report in advance of consideration on 
the House Floor. Democratic appropriators had no say in their 
inclusion--in fact, we only saw these changes once they had been made 
public. The report is not amendable on the House Floor, so there was no 
recourse in challenging any of these new alterations beyond demanding 
they be removed in the conference process with the Senate.
  Now lets talk about some of the policy decisions within H.R. 5894, 
starting with the astounding 28 percent cut to the Department of 
Education. This bill decimates support for children in K-12 elementary 
schools and early childhood education; including an 80 percent cut to 
Title I that is meant to help the most vulnerable students and school 
districts in our country.
  I have heard from my constituents--teachers, principals, 
paraprofessionals, parents, and students--that we are facing a crisis 
in our classrooms. This bill does not address the teacher shortage or 
the extensive learning loss occurring in our schools post-COVID; and 
this bill does not help make college more affordable.
  Instead, this bill makes devastating cuts to the bedrock of American 
education, leaves our teachers out in the cold without sufficient 
resources, and eliminates opportunities for students to access need-
based financial aid for their postsecondary education. This bill also 
eliminates all funding to the Corporation for Public Broadcasting, 
including their educational programming for young children, Ready To 
Learn.
  In addition to education spending cuts, House Republicans have also 
taken aim at workforce development. This bill eliminates funding for 
the Federal Work Study, Youth Job Training, and Adult Job Training 
programs, effectively denying job and employment training services to 
420,000 Americans who face barriers to finding a good-paying job. House 
Republicans also cut $313 million from worker protection agencies like 
OSHA, putting hardworking Americans at risk at home in Minnesota and 
across the country.
  This bill hurts the National Institutes of Health by cutting $2.8 
billion from their topline budget, which will stymy medical innovation. 
It makes a $139 million cut to the National Institute of Mental Health 
at a time when our country is facing a mental health crisis. The bill 
also contains major cuts to the National Cancer Institute, hurting our 
research and treatment capabilities for those with cancer here in 
America and around the world.
  Unsurprisingly, this bill also takes aim at womens health by cutting 
programs that support maternal and child health, eliminating programs 
that provide access to health services and contraception, and adding 
numerous poison pill riders that further strip a womens right to make 
medical decisions about her own

body with her doctor. H.R. 5894 prohibits funding to Planned 
Parenthood, eliminates funding for Title X Family Planning, and makes a 
$35 million cut to the Maternal and Child Health Block Grant.
  Supporting our children and families is the bare minimum of what our 
government should do for its people. This bill fails at every level to 
do so. Instead of reevaluating their extreme funding bills and working 
together with Democrats to create legislation that will improve 
American lives, House Republicans are distracted by their own chaos and 
are intent on placating the most extreme in their caucus. For these 
reasons and more, I must oppose H.R. 5894 and I urge my colleagues to 
do the same.
November 19, 2023 marks the one year 
anniversary of a violent attack in Colorado Springs killing five people 
and injuring 22 others. I would like to once again extend my prayers of 
peace and healing for the families and victims. During the incident, 
two heroes took action that night to prevent further harm and should be 
honored for their heroic acts.
  Richard Fierro and Thomas James stepped up at their own peril to save 
lives and protect others. The two heroes worked together to stop the 
gunman and remove the firearm from him, Mr. James even incurred 
injuries when a bullet was fired into his abdomen. Because of the 
decisive, quick, and selfless action of these two men, more lives were 
not taken by the attacker. This is the true spirit of selflessness and 
duty that we are privileged to experience so commonly in Colorado 
Springs.
  Information Technician 2nd Class Thomas James was awarded the Navy 
and Marine Corps Medal, the highest non-combat decoration the Navy can 
award for heroism.
  Richard Fierro, a retired Army Major, received the Lifesaving 
Military Hero of The Year Award from the American Red Cross.
  May we all remember their actions to save the lives of others and 
thank them for their service to our Nation and community on the 
anniversary of this terrible event.
I rise today to recognize and honor a great 
trailblazer from my district, Wynona Lipman, on what would have been 
her 100th birthday. Born in 1923, Mrs. Lipman was the first African-
American woman to be elected to the New Jersey State Senate when she 
won her seat in 1971. She served the 29th Legislative District for 27 
years, the Senates longest-serving member at the time of her death in 
1999.
  Before she was a political trailblazer, Mrs. Lipman was a teacher. 
She taught French at Morehouse College and tutored a famous civil 
rights advocate, Martin Luther King, Jr. She left that position to 
pursue a Ph.D. degree at Columbia University. During her time at 
Columbia, Mrs. Lipman earned a Fulbright fellowship to study at the 
Sorbonne in Paris for two years. When she returned, Mrs. Lipman 
finished her Ph.D. degree and eventually moved to Montclair, New 
Jersey, where she became an associate professor at Essex County 
College.
  In Montclair, Mrs. Lipman became active in local politics. In 1968, 
she won her first election to become an Essex County Board of Chosen 
Freeholder, where she became President of the Board in 1971. Then Mrs. 
Lipman ran for the New Jersey State Senate and defeated Republican 
Senator Milton Waldor by less than 1,000 votes out of 170,000 cast. 
During her 27 years in the State Senate, Mrs. Lipman was often the only 
woman serving there and worked diligently to protect the LGBTQ+ 
community and children on the Governors Advisory Council on AIDS and 
Task Force on Child Abuse and Neglect.
``Womens Hall of Fame in 1998. 
Today, her legacy is supported throughout the area. There is the Wynona 
Lipman Ethnic Studies Center at Kean University, the Wynona Lipman 
Chairholder at the Center for American Women in Politics and Rutgers 
University, the Wynona Lipman Child Advocacy Center (known as Wynonas 
House) for abused children in Newark, and the future Wynona Lipman 
Courthouse in Essex County. Next week, there will be an exhibit titled 
``Stronger than Steel: The Wynona Lipman Story at the New Jersey 
Historical Society.
, I ask my colleagues in the House of Representatives to 
join me in celebrating her life of public service and her legacy in New 
Jersey politics.
Mr Speaker, today I pay tribute to the life of a mid-
Michigan icon who was a builder in every sense of the word. Lonnie 
McKissic, Sr. passed away on November 3, 2023, but the legacy he worked 
so hard to construct in his 88 years on this planet--physically, 
emotionally, and spiritually--lives on in this community and in the 
many lives he touched.
  Lonnie was born in Clarksdale, Mississippi, in 1935, the son of 
Robert and Myrtle McKissic, and his early years were by no means easy. 
His father passed away when he was just a toddler, and Lonnie was only 
able to attend school through the third grade. Though still a child, he 
was sent to work in the cotton fields, and later at a mill yard, to 
help support the family. He was just 16 years old when he married the 
love of his life, Odell, and shortly after the two made the move north 
to Lansing, Michigan.
  When Lonnie picked up his first construction job at age 18 in 
Lansing, he likely didnt know he was laying the foundation for his 
future. After years of hard work and learning the ins and outs of the 
industry, in 1969 he was ready to make a go on his own and launched the 
family business: McKissic and Sons Construction. Not only did the 
company break ground on numerous homes, churches, and well-known 
Lansing-area buildings, Lonnie broke barriers by becoming one of the 
first Black contractors in the region.
  Over the years he also built a large and loving family, raising six 
sons, three daughters, and ten grandchildren, and prided himself on 
passing the trade to younger generations. Today, the construction 
company continues with his son Michael at the helm. In addition, 
Michael shares his fathers lessons with the community through his non-
profit, which teaches construction skills to young people in an effort 
to provide a meaningful path for the future that can help turn the tide 
of violence in the Lansing area.
  A man of profound faith, Lonnie was deeply involved with Mt. Zion All 
Nations Church, where his 69 years of devotion earned him the title of 
longest-serving member. During that time, he held various other titles, 
including Chairman of the Board, Deacon, Vice-Chair of the Executive 
Council, Elder, and choir member. He mentored hundreds of young people 
over the years, and was known as a spiritual father to many.
  In everything he did, Lonnie McKissic used his hands, his heart, and 
his life to build up the community. Brick by brick, word by word, 
lesson by lesson, he laid out a blueprint for what it means to be a 
servant leader, and constructed his life on a bedrock of faith, family, 
and hard work. I send my condolences to his family, and ask that we now 
dedicate ourselves to building upon his memory, which will live on in 
Lansing.
today I rise in honor of John Brandon, 
President and Executive Director of the Marion County Commission on 
Youth (MCCOY), who will enter his retirement at the end of this year.
  For 45 years, John has dedicated his life to youth development, 
leading positive changes in local programs and agencies and at larger 
city, state, and national systemic levels. As an adjunct professor at 
the undergraduate and graduate levels, an agency director focused on 
increased opportunities for young people, and a trainer and facilitator 
for youth workers continued education John has nurtured Indianapolis 
young people in countless ways.
  Johns legacy is one of advocacy and empowerment. He has been 
instrumental in guiding projects and initiatives aimed at the 
development of our youth, including a city-wide youth employment 
effort, developing more support and services for unhoused youth, and 
reforming our child welfare system to be more family-focused. Under 
Johns leadership, MCCOY has been an instrumental partner in my yearly 
Youth Opportunities Fair, which connects young people to employment, 
internships, and other programs during the summer months. His 
passionate belief that young people must be part of the systems that 
impact them is evidenced through youth participation on MCCOYs board 
and the agencys facilitation of the Mayors Youth Council.
  Active in his community, John has served on numerous community-based 
nonprofit boards, including the Martin Luther King Jr. Multiservice 
Center, the Indiana Afterschool Network, and the Hawthorn Community 
Center. At a national level, John dedicated a decade to the Partnership 
for Americas Childrens board of directors.
  Today, I ask my colleagues to join me in honoring John Brandon as he 
enters this new chapter filled with cycling, reading, and family. We 
celebrate his legacy of outstanding accomplishments as we continue to 
ensure a brighter future for our nations youth.
I rise today to honor the Tierra del Sol 
Housing Corporation and commemorate their 50th anniversary. Tierra del 
Sol has proudly been serving the needs of low-income families in my 
district since 1973 and has promoted economic and social empowerment 
through homeownership programs, employment training, and access to 
financial resources. Their work has helped ensure financial security 
for New Mexican families and build stable communities where all can 
thrive.
  Throughout their 50 years of service, Tierra del Sol has instituted 
various programs to assist rural New Mexicans. From rural farm rental 
housing to supportive housing for the elderly to major subdivision 
developments, Tierra del Sol Housing Corporation has tirelessly worked 
towards their mission.
  In recent years, Tierra del Sol has led the construction of single-
family housing under their self-help housing program. That recent 
construction has allowed community members access to affordable housing 
and energy-efficient living, putting New Mexico well on the road to 
becoming a leader in clean energy practices. As we look to the future, 
I am confident that Tierra del Sol will continue to find innovative 
ways to reach out to New Mexicans, while promoting the health of our 
State more broadly.
  On behalf of the great people of New Mexicos 2nd Congressional 
District, I thank Tierra del Sol for their service to the people of New 
Mexico and congratulate them on celebrating 50 years of service. Their 
work has made our community stronger, safer, and more prosperous, and I 
am excited to see what they accomplish for generations to come.
I rise to congratulate Greater 
Latrobe School District for being recognized by the National 
Association of Music Merchants (NAMM) Foundation as one of the best 
communities for music education in 2023.
  The NAMM Foundation celebrates schools and school districts by 
recognizing their ability to train and educate the next generation of 
musicians. 830 school districts, including Greater Latrobe School 
District, were recognized for the outstanding efforts of their 
teachers, administrators, parents, and students.
  According to NAMM, over 3 million children did not have access to 
proper music education in 2019. Every student deserves a chance to 
learn and develop their artistic capabilities, and Greater Latrobe 
School Districts continuous efforts undoubtedly help our children in 
Southwest Pennsylvania.
, on behalf of the people of Pennsylvanias 14th 
Congressional District, I congratulate Greater Latrobe School District 
on this momentous occasion.
I rise to congratulate Hempfield Area 
School District

for being recognized by the National Association of Music Merchants 
(NAMM) Foundation as one of the best communities for music education in 
2023.
  The NAMM Foundation celebrates schools and school districts by 
recognizing their ability to train and educate the next generation of 
musicians. 830 school districts, including Hempfield Area School 
District, were recognized for the outstanding efforts of their 
teachers, administrators, parents, and students.
  According to NAMM, over 3 million children did not have access to 
proper music education in 2019. Every student deserves a chance to 
learn and develop their artistic capabilities, and Hempfield Area 
School Districts continuous efforts undoubtedly help our children in 
Southwest Pennsylvania.
, on behalf of the people of Pennsylvanias 14th 
Congressional District, I congratulate Hempfield Area School District 
on this momentous occasion.
I rise to congratulate Kiski Area 
School District for being recognized by the National Association of 
Music Merchants (NAMM) Foundation as one of the best communities for 
music education in 2023.
  The NAMM Foundation celebrates schools and school districts by 
recognizing their ability

to train and educate the next generation of musicians, 830 school 
districts, including Kiski Area School District, were recognized for 
the outstanding efforts of their teachers, administrators, parents, and 
students.
  According to NAMM, over 3 million children did not have access to 
proper music education in 2019. Every student deserves a chance to 
learn and develop their artistic capabilities, and Kiski Area School 
Districts continuous efforts undoubtedly help our children in 
Southwest Pennsylvania.
, on behalf of the people of Pennsylvanias 14th 
Congressional District, I congratulate Kiski Area School District on 
this momentous occasion.
I rise to congratulate Mount Pleasant 
Area School District for being recognized by the National Association 
of Music Merchants (NAMM) Foundation as one of the best communities for 
music education in 2023.
  The NAMM Foundation celebrates schools and school districts by 
recognizing their ability to train and educate the next generation of 
musicians. 830 school districts, including Mount Pleasant Area School 
District, were recognized for the outstanding efforts of their 
teachers, administrators, parents, and students.
  According to NAMM, over 3 million children did not have access to 
proper music education in 2019. Every student deserves a chance to 
learn and develop their artistic capabilities, and Mount Pleasant Area 
School Districts continuous efforts undoubtedly help our children in 
Southwest Pennsylvania.
, on behalf of the people of Pennsylvanias 14th 
Congressional District, I congratulate Mount Pleasant Area School 
District on this momentous occasion.
today the 12th Congressional District 
recognizes David Kline for his outstanding contributions as the City of 
Dearborns Veteran of the Year.
  Born and raised in Detroit, Mr. Kline enlisted in the United States 
Army in 1966 after graduation from Detroits Cody High School. During 
his ten years and eleven months of service, Mr. Kline earned many 
commendations and certifications, including the Army Commendation 
Medal, Presidential Citation, Unit Citation, the Vietnam Gallantry 
Cross, Good Conduct, and the National Defense Service Medal. After 
serving in the army, Mr. Kline returned home to Michigan and began a 
thriving career in construction.
  An engaged member of the community, Mr. Kline remains active numerous 
veterans organizations in southeast Michigan, including Vietnam 
Veterans of America Chapter 267 and American Legion Post 364. He has 
held multiple leadership positions at both organizations. He is 
passionate in his commitment to helping his fellow service members, 
especially those in need, and works tirelessly to ensure they receive 
the support and care they deserve.
  Please join me in recognizing Mr. David Kline as he is honored as 
Dearborn, Michigans 2023 Veteran of the Year. We are grateful for his 
service and leadership.
I rise today to recognize the Porterville 
Elks Lodge on their 100-year anniversary and thank them for their 
significant contributions to the Porterville community. The Porterville 
Elks Lodge was established in 1923 on Portervilles Main Street.
  For more than a century, the lodge has served as a meeting place for 
residents of the community and the home of the Porterville Elks Lodge 
Club. The clubs unwavering commitment to public service and the 
Porterville community has guided its mission since the lodges 
founding. Today, the club has 149 members, all of whom dedicate their 
time to giving back to and investing in the local community. The club 
is passionate about the well-being of Portervilles residents and 
focuses many of their efforts on helping children and veterans
  Last year, the club raised more than $32,000 for the Purple Pig Major 
Project--the second-largest contribution from the California delegation 
of clubs. The projects funds are used to support disabled youth with 
the medical treatments and therapies they need to thrive. Through their 
affiliation with the Elks National Foundation, the Porterville Elks 
Lodge Club has also awarded students throughout the community with 
scholarships to support their academic goals and connected veterans and 
servicemembers with rehabilitation services.
  During the recent flooding in California, the Porterville Elks Lodge 
Club worked with the Central California Family Crisis Center and 
Parenting Network to donate jackets, baby formula, and other items to 
residents in need. Their efforts were critical in helping families in 
my district recover from the devastating storms. The clubs 
longstanding history of service is ingrained in the fabric of the 
Porterville community.
, I ask my colleagues in the United States House of 
Representatives to join me in celebrating the Porterville Elks Lodge on 
their 100-year anniversary. Their work to enrich the community of 
Porterville will be felt for generations to come.
I rise today to urge my House colleagues to 
join in protecting our worlds fragile coral reef ecosystems by 
restricting international imports of protected ornamental reef fish and 
coral species collected by destructive and unsustainable practices.
  Our oceans are indispensable to life on our planet, not only to our 
global environment but to the billions that are directly or indirectly 
reliant on its resources. Our oceans in turn rely on the health and 
diversity of our coral reefs, some of our most diverse ecosystems, with 
nearly 25 percent of the oceans fish dependent on coral reefs for 
shelter, food and reproduction. And our coral reefs are interdependent 
with healthy, diverse and sustainable marine flora and fauna.
  Among these are prized ornamental reef fish and coral species highly 
valued by collectors. While it is possible to collect them at 
sustainable levels which do not harm the coral reef or broader marine 
ecosystem, high demand leads too often to unsustainable and destructive 
collection practices such as overcollection of species overall, 
overcollection of younger specimens, collection through reef-dredging, 
gill nets, explosives or poison, and harm to specimens leading to 
excessive deaths in transit. Most of the collection occurs 
internationally where most of our worlds coral reefs are found, in 
countries, such as in Southeast Asia, which do not have strong 
regulation or enforcement regimens against unsustainable or destructive 
practices.
  As the largest importer of ornamental reef fish, our country has both 
responsibility for creating the demand that leads to such practices, 
and the opportunity to channel that demand to sustainable collection. 
The Saving Natural Ecosystems and Marine Organisms Act would do so by 
prohibiting the import into our country of protected reef species taken 
using unsustainable or destructive practices. The enforcement mechanism 
would be administrative certification, in conjunction with cooperating 
collecting countries where possible, that ornamental reef fish and 
species to be imported into our country were collected without 
following those practices.
  I ask for my colleagues support of this bill which is one piece of a 
much larger effort to save our oceans from their own worst enemy: us.