I rise to welcome to America one of our 
worlds significant religious leaders--Ecumenical Patriarch 
Bartholomew, the Spiritual Head of Orthodox Christians, the second 
largest Christian Church in the world. Around the world there are over 
250 million Orthodox Christians. In America there are well over a 
million Orthodox Christians with Churches in all 50 states. Even in low 
population states there are numerous churches--like for example, four 
Orthodox Churches in the state of Wyoming.
  After his visit in Washington, D.C. with our President at the White 
House and with the bipartisan leadership of the Congress, he will be 
traveling to New York City to receive the Templeton Prize. That Prize 
is one of the worlds leading recognitions of world leaders who make an 
exceptional contribution to the deepest questions regarding the 
universe and humankinds place and purpose within it. Previous winners 
of that Prize have included Archbishop Desmond Tutu, the Dalai Lama, 
Mother Teresa. and Billy Graham.
  His All-Holiness is also a recipient of the Congressional Gold Medal, 
the highest Congressional Award. That Gold Medal had also been awarded 
to George Washington and to Abraham Lincoln. The Congress emphasized 
that Gold Medal by having more Members of Congress asking to have their 
names added as co-sponsors of that legislation than any other bill 
introduced during the 105th Congress. The Congressional Gold Medal 
recipients who were presented with the Award immediately before and 
immediately after Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew, were Mother Teresa 
and Nelson Mandela.
  Within Christian Orthodoxy, an over 2,000-year-old religion, His All-
Holiness is the longest serving Ecumenical Patriarch. He is the 269th 
direct successor of Jesus Christs first Apostle, Andrew. Andrews 
brother Peter carried his mission to what is today the Vatican. Todays 
Pope Leo is the 266th direct successor of the Apostle Peter.
today, I rise today to recognize and 
celebrate the 100th anniversary of Caterpillar Inc., marking a century 
of customer-centric innovation and industry-leading transformation. 
With a strong history in my district, Caterpillar serves as a 
cornerstone example of American innovation and industry leadership.
  Founded in 1925, when the Holt Manufacturing Company and the C.L. 
Best Tractor Company merged to form what became the Caterpillar Tractor 
Company, the business began with its first track type tractor designed 
to pull combine harvesters. Now, Caterpillar delivers autonomous 
construction and mining equipment and engines that power the world, 
helping customers complete infrastructure projects that have shaped the 
modern era.
  Caterpillar is a consistent leader in industrial innovation. With 
more than 113,000 employees worldwide, this American based company 
continues to serve customers across the globe. Through their work and 
customer focus, Caterpillar helps communities in Illinois, across our 
country, and around the world rise to meet challenges and build a 
better future.
  As we commemorate this incredible milestone. I want to recognize the 
entire Caterpillar team for their entrepreneurial spirit, strong 
values, and unwavering commitment to manufacturing and innovation in 
the United States.
  I congratulate Caterpillar on 100 years of American excellence. May 
the next century strengthen the values that make Caterpillar, Illinois, 
and our Nation strong.
I rise today to celebrate the 90th birthday 
of Mrs. Wanda Faye Babb of Paris, Texas.
20, 1935, in Paris, Texas. Mrs. Babb 
attended school in Paris, the same place where she would grow into an 
active member within her church and community.
  She has dedicated her life to faith, family, and community. Mrs. Babb 
has been a devoted member of many churches and has spent her time 
teaching Sunday school and guiding the youth. On November 25, 1953, 
, the late Wendell Babb. 
Together, they raised three wonderful children, and over the years, 
their family grew to include many cherished grandchildren and great-
grandchildren.
, a business 
started by her mother, where she worked for decades as a beloved 
cosmetologist. She took pride in her business and treated her clients 
like family. In addition to the beauty shop, Mrs. Babb spent time as a 
representative for Mary Kay, where she strived to provide opportunities 
for her employees. Throughout her life, she has been a dedicated and 
devoted wife, mother, and grandmother, striving to instill a strong 
faith and love of music in her grandkids. In her free time, she enjoys 
cooking, playing piano, and recognizing every Western television and 
film actor. Mrs. Babb credits her life to the Lord, her family, and 
loving her country.
  I have requested the United States flag to be flown over our Nations 
Capitol in recognition of Mrs. Babbs incredible life and journey. May 
God bless Mrs. Babb on 90 years of life filled with patriotism, faith, 
and joy.
HONORING THE LIFE AND LEGACY OF SERGEANT DONALD ``DONNY GRUNDHAUSER
I rise today to honor my constituent, 
Sergeant Donald ``Donny Grundhauser, who recently passed away after a 
courageous battle with cancer.
  Sergeant Grundhauser joined the Saint Paul Police Department in 1994, 
proud to serve the area where he was born and raised. Over the course 
of his 30-year career, he served in a wide range of demanding 
assignments, including SWAT, the Homicide Unit, the Gang and Gun Unit, 
ATF Federal Task Force, East Investigations as an Acting Commander and 
the Special Operations Unit. In recognition of his outstanding 
contributions, Sergeant Grundhauser received three Unit Citations, 
three Medals of Commendation, two Unit Letters of Recognition, and five 
individual Letters of Recognition.
  Sergeant Grundhauser was deeply respected by his neighbors and 
colleagues for his courage, selflessness, and commitment to helping 
others. Known to his fellow officers as ``Grundy, he was a mentor and 
friend to many, and he lived by the belief that it never cost anything 
to be kind. His family carries on his legacy of service, with his son, 
Nicholas, and his two brothers, Mark and Keith, also serving in the 
Saint Paul Police Department.
  I offer my deepest condolences to Sergeant Grundhausers family--his 
wife, Kelly, and his children, Jacob and Nicholas. Sergeant Grundhauser 
represented the best of law enforcement, and I thank him and his family 
for their service to our community.
today, the 12th Congressional District honors 
the extraordinary life and legacy of Ignacio ``Ziggy Gonzalez, a 
beloved son of southwest Detroit. A proud veteran and dedicated 
educator, Ziggy lived a long and impactful life of 94 years, which 
stretched far beyond the baseball diamond and hockey rink.
  Born in 1930, Ziggy proudly served in the United States Air Force 
before returning home to raise a family and dedicate his life to 
teaching and coaching. As a beloved educator at Western High School, 
``Mr. G inspired countless students with his humor, wisdom, and 
unshakable belief in their potential.
  Ziggy was also the heart and soul of Clark Park, where he got the 
name ``Mr. Clark Park and built hockey and baseball programs that 
gave generations of young people a place to play, learn, and belong. To 
many, he will forever be ``Mr. Clark Park. His love of family, 
sports, community, and music, especially jazz, reflected the very best 
of Detroit.
  We extend our love to his wife, siblings, children, grandchildren, 
and friends as we celebrate his life, and we are committed to carrying 
forward his spirit of service, joy, and justice.
today, the 12th Congressional District of 
Michigan honors the life of Peter Mays, a dedicated and beloved member 
of the Trinity Health family for over 20 years. Peter served in the 
Information Technology department, where he took pride in his work and 
was known for his reliability, generosity, and willingness to help 
others. He continued working as long as his health allowed, retiring 
just one week before his passing. When not working, you could find 
Peter riding his bike around the city of Detroit.
  During a Trinity Health Town Hall attended by more than 600 
employees, colleagues paid tribute to Peter in a special Colleague 
Remembrance presentation. His coworkers, many of whom became close 
friends, stood by him and his family through challenging years, 
offering hospital visits, home support, and heartfelt gestures of 
kindness.
  Peters service, friendship, and example will be deeply missed, but 
his impact will continue to inspire those who knew and loved him. The 
12th Congressional District of Michigan honors the life of Peter Mays 
and extends heartfelt condolences to all his loved ones and friends.
on Monday, September 8, 
2025, I missed Roll Call Vote Nos. 240 and 241 due to official 
business. Had I been present, I would have voted YEA on Roll Call No. 
240, and YEA on Roll Call No. 241.
Title IV of Senate Resolution 4, agreed to by the Senate of February 
4, 1977, calls for establishment of a system for a computerized 
schedule of all meetings and hearings of Senate committees, 
subcommittees, joint committees, and committees of conference. This 
title requires all such committees to notify the Office of the Senate 
Daily Digest--designated by the Rules Committee--of the time, place and 
purpose of the meetings, when scheduled and any cancellations or 
changes in the meetings as they occur.
  As an additional procedure along with the computerization of this 
information, the Office of the Senate Daily Digest will prepare this 
information for printing in the Extensions of Remarks section of the 
Congressional Record on Monday and Wednesday of each week.

  Meetings scheduled for Tuesday, September 16, 2025 may be found in 
the Daily Digest of todays Record.

     9:15 a.m.
       Committee on Foreign Relations
         Business meeting to consider the nominations of Thomas 
           DiNanno, of Florida, to be Under Secretary for Arms 
           Control and International Security, Michael DeSombre, 
           of Illinois, to be an Assistant Secretary (East Asian 
           and Pacific Affairs), Jacob Helberg, of Florida, to be 
           an Under Secretary (Economic Growth, Energy, and the 
           Environment), Benjamin Black, of New York, to be Chief 
           Executive Officer of the United States International 
           Development Finance Corporation, Paul Kapur, of 
           California, to be Assistant Secretary for South Asian 
           Affairs, Nicole McGraw, of Florida, to be Ambassador to 
           the Republic of Croatia, Somers Farkas, of New York, to 
           be Ambassador to the Republic of Malta, Kenneth Howery, 
           of Texas, to be Ambassador to the Kingdom of Denmark, 
           Chris Pratt, of Utah, to be an Assistant Secretary 
           (Political-Military Affairs), Stacey Feinberg, of 
           California, to be Ambassador to the Grand Duchy of 
           Luxembourg, Leandro Rizzuto, of Florida, to be 
           Permanent Representative of the United States of 
           America to the Organization of American States, with 
           the rank of Ambassador, Howard Brodie, of Florida, to 
           be Ambassador to the Republic of Finland, Arthur 
           Fisher, of North Carolina, to be Ambassador to the 
           Republic of Austria, Nicholas Merrick, of Texas, to be 
           Ambassador to the Czech Republic, Roman Pipko, of 
           Florida, to be Ambassador to the Republic of Estonia, 
           Anjani Sinha, of Florida, to be Ambassador to the 
           Republic of Singapore, Thomas Rose, of Florida, to be 
           Ambassador to the Republic of Poland, Lynda Blanchard, 
           of Alabama, to be U.S. Representative to the United 
           Nations Agencies for Food and Agriculture, with the 
           rank of Ambassador, Sarah Rogers, of New York, to be 
           Under Secretary for Public Diplomacy, Caleb Orr, of 
           Texas, to be an Assistant Secretary (Economic and 
           Business Affairs), Michael G. Waltz, of Florida, to be 
           the Representative of the United States of America to 
           the United Nations, with the Rank of Ambassador, and 
           the Representative of the United States of America in 
           the Security Council of the United Nations, and to be 
           Representative of the United States of America to the 
           Sessions of the General Assembly of the United Nations 
           during his tenure of service as Representative of the 
           United States of America to the United Nations, Richard 
           Buchan III, of Florida, to be Ambassador to the Kingdom 
           of Morocco, John Giordano, of Pennsylvania, to be 
           Ambassador to the Republic of Namibia, Michel Issa, of 
           Florida, to be Ambassador to the Lebanese Republic, 
           Sean ONeill, of Virginia, to be Ambassador to the 
           Kingdom of Thailand, Julie Stufft, of Ohio, to be 
           Ambassador to the Republic of Kazakhstan, Bill Bazzi, 
           of Michigan, to be Ambassador to the Republic of 
           Tunisia, Melinda Hildebrand, of Texas, to be Ambassador 
           to the Republic of Costa Rica, Todd Wilcox, of Florida, 
           to be an Assistant Secretary (Diplomatic Security), 
           Riley Barnes, of Texas, to be Assistant Secretary for 
           Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor, Dan Negrea, of 
           Connecticut, to be Representative of the United States 
           of America on the Economic and Social Council of the 
           United Nations, with the rank of Ambassador, and to 
           serve concurrently and without additional compensation 
           as an Alternate Representative of the United States of 
           America to the Sessions of the General Assembly of the 
           United Nations, and William White, of New York, to be 
           Ambassador to the Kingdom of Belgium, all of the 
           Department of State.
                                                             S-116
     9:50 a.m.
       Committee on Environment and Public Works
         Business meeting to consider the nomination of Jeffrey 
           Hall, of Virginia, to be an Assistant Administrator of 
           the Environmental Protection Agency; to be immediately 
           followed by oversight hearings to examine the U.S. Army 
           Corps of Engineers.
                                                            SD-562
     10 a.m.
       Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation
         Business meeting to consider the nomination of Neil 
           Jacobs, of North Carolina, to be Under Secretary of 
           Commerce for Oceans and Atmosphere; to be immediately 
           followed by hearings to examine the nominations of 
           Michael Graham, of Virginia, to be a Member of the 
           National Transportation Safety Board, Ethan Klein, of 
           New Jersey, to be an Associate Director of the Office 
           of Science and Technology Policy, and Joyce Meyer, of 
           Virginia, to be Under Secretary of Commerce for 
           Economic Affairs.
                                                            SR-253
       Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions
         To hold hearings to examine reviewing recent events at 
           the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and 
           implications for childrens health.
                                                            SD-430
     10:15 a.m.
       Committee on the Judiciary
         To hold hearings to examine certain pending nominations.
                                                            SD-G50
     2 p.m.
       Committee on the Judiciary
       Subcommittee on Border Security and Immigration
         To hold hearings to examine missing unaccompanied alien 
           children and criminal sponsors.
                                                            SD-226
       Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe
         To hold hearings to examine conspiracy theories, 
           antisemitism, and democratic decline.
                                                        2358C-RHOB
     2:30 p.m.
       Committee on Indian Affairs
         To hold hearings to examine Indian Self-Determination and 
           Education Assistance Act successes and opportunities at 
           the Department of the Interior and the Indian Health 
           Service.
                                                            SD-628
       Committee on Small Business and Entrepreneurship
         To hold hearings to examine using the 504 program to 
           build Americas manufacturing future.
                                                           SR-428A
     3 p.m.
       Select Committee on Intelligence
         To receive a closed briefing on certain intelligence 
           matters.
                                                            SH-219
     3:30 p.m.
       Special Committee on Aging
         To hold hearings to examine drug safety, supply chains, 
           and the risk to aging Americans.
                                                            SH-216
     4 p.m.
       Committee on Veterans Affairs
         To hold hearings to examine strengthening services for 
           veterans with spinal cord injury and disorder.
                                                            SD-106

     9 a.m.
       Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
         Business meeting to consider an original bill entitled, 
           ``Free Speech Protection and Reforming Expiring 
           Authorities, an original bill entitled, ``Safer 
           Counter-Drone Authorities, S. 1221, to prohibit 
           contracting with persons that have business operations 
           with the Maduro regime, S. 2283, to designate the 
           facility of the United States Postal Service located at 
           201 West Oklahoma Avenue in Guthrie, Oklahoma, as the 
           ``Oscar J. Upham Post Office, and S. 252, to increase 
           access to agency guidance documents.
                                                            SD-342
     10 a.m.
       Committee on Armed Services
         To hold hearings to examine the nominations of Platte 
           Moring, of South Carolina, to be Inspector General, 
           Kirsten Davies, of Tennessee, to be Chief Information 
           Officer, James Mazol, of Virginia, to be a Deputy Under 
           Secretary, and Derrick Anderson, of Virginia, to be an 
           Assistant Secretary, all of the Department of Defense.
                                                            SD-G50
       Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions
         To hold hearings to examine the state of K-12 education.
                                                            SD-430
     10:15 a.m.
       Committee on the Judiciary
         Business meeting to consider the nominations of Jennifer 
           Lee Mascott, of Delaware, to be United States Circuit 
           Judge for the Third Circuit, Robert P. Chamberlin, and 
           James D. Maxwell II, both to be a United States 
           District Judge for the Northern District of 
           Mississippi, Edmund G. LaCour, Jr., and Harold D. Mooty 
           III, both to be a United States District Judge for the 
           Northern District of Alabama, Bill Lewis, to be United 
           States District Judge for the Middle District of 
           Alabama, David Courcelle, to be United States Attorney 
           for the Eastern District of Louisiana for the term of 
           four years, and Scott Leary, to be United States 
           Attorney for the Northern District of Mississippi for 
           the term of four years.
                                                            SH-216
THANKING JOHN McINTYRE (MAC) TOLAR FOR HIS DEDICATED SERVICE TO OUR 
                              of wisconsin
I rise today to acknowledge and thank John 
McIntyre (Mac) Tolar for dedicating over three decades of service to 
our Nations military, state, local, and federal governments, including 
the past thirteen years as an employee within the United States House 
of Representatives.
  After graduating from the University of South Carolina, Mac enlisted 
in the United States Marine Corps as an infantry officer in 1987. Mac 
remained on active duty for eight years and continued his reserve duty 
through 2012. During his distinguished military career Mac was also a 
Reconnaissance Officer and deployed to the Middle East in support of 
Operation Desert Shield, Desert Storm, and in support of the Global War 
on Terror.
  Mac was decorated with four awards for exceptional individual service 
and received numerous awards from his unit. While on reserve duty, Mac 
earned his law degree from the University of South Carolina in 2001 and 
completed his military career as a Judge Advocate.
  After earning his law degree, Mac embarked on a career in local 
government. From November 2001 to February 2003, Mac served as an 
Assistant Solicitor for the 15th Circuit in Conway, South Carolina, 
where he was responsible for prosecuting misdemeanor offenses and 
General Session transfer cases. Mac showed tremendous initiative in 
this role by developing and implementing a successful DUI curriculum 
for local law enforcement personnel. This training program was so 
successful that it was later expanded to the South Carolina Criminal 
Justice Academy and the Commission on Prosecution Coordination.
  Mac continued his career in South Carolina serving as the in-house 
Counsel for the Georgetown County government. In this role, Mac was 
responsible for drafting, reviewing, and approving legal documents, 
including deeds, contracts, leases, dedication instruments, financing 
documents, resolutions and ordinances. These wide-ranging 
responsibilities afforded Mac the opportunity to provide expert legal 
representation to several county offices, boards, commissions, and 
employees.
  After a four-year tour in private practice, Mac joined the office of 
United States Representative Martha Roby as her Military Legislative 
Counsel. Macs military and legal background perfectly positioned him 
for his role in the office. His primary responsibilities included 
serving as the Congresswomans Veterans affairs, national security, and 
foreign policy advisor. Mac was instrumental in creating and managing 
Representative Robys constituent Veterans Advisory Committee, which 
allowed the Congresswoman to gain additional insights, perspectives, 
and ideas to drive her oversight and legislative agenda.
  In July 2014, Mac landed his next role in Congress working for the 
Select Committee on Benghazi. He was initially hired to serve as the 
Select Committees Senior Counsel and then moved into the important 
role of Security Manager. As an employee of the Select Committee, Mac 
analyzed thousands of pages of documents, communications, and other 
executive branch materials relating to the terrorist attacks in 
Benghazi.
  Once his tenure with the Select Committee ended, Mac landed in the 
Office of the Chief Administrative Officer in 2016 and immediately 
began serving as the Director of the Wounded Warrior Program, now known 
as the Green &amp; Gold Congressional Aide Program.
  Over the past nine years, Macs leadership, stewardship, and 
dedication have driven several significant enhancements to this 
outstanding program. These efforts include modernizing several 
components of the program, updating the requirements for participation, 
broadening the scope to cover Gold Star Family Members and Active-Duty 
Military Spouses, expanding allocations assigned to Member, Committee, 
Leadership, and House Officer organizations, enhancing the orientation 
program and professional development offerings for the Aides, and 
launching the programs social media presence and dynamic website.
  Macs impact on the program is best seen in the lives and careers of 
the many Aides who came through during his tenure as Director. From 
December 2016 to August 2025, 339 Aides completed the two-year 
assignment. Of those, 37 percent of them continued their careers in 
Congress. Additionally, nearly 80 percent of the Aides built on their 
experience by finding new roles in government, transitioning 
successfully to the private sector, or enrolling in college to further 
their education. These achievements are a true reflection of Macs 
leadership--underscoring not only the strength of the program, but also 
the lasting opportunities it provided to so many.
  I would also like to recognize and thank Macs family for their 
encouragement, love, and support, including his wife Helen Tolar--who 
was also a decorated House and Senate senior staff member--and their 
three children Walker, Mary Mac, and Oliver.
, I am honored to recognize Mac Tolar for his outstanding 
contributions and overall impact on our Nation. Whether it was in the 
military, local or state government, or as an employee of the House of 
Representatives, Mac always made a difference in each job and an impact 
in every role.
I rise today to welcome His All-Holiness 
Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew to the United States.
  His first visit since 2021, he joins us on his eighth Apostolic trip 
to our country during which he will receive the prestigious Templeton 
Prize for his environmental advocacy.
  The ``Green Patriarchs landmark 1997 speech in Santa Barbara--in 
which he first posited the notion of ecological sin--is striking for 
how revolutionary it was then, and how prescient it remains today. In 
particular, one line from His All-Holliness remarks 28 years ago 
struck me as worthy of meditating upon in the tumultuous times in which 
we find ourselves.
  In his speech, His All-Holliness offers the following: ``we lovingly 
suggest to all the people of the earth, that they seek to help one 
another to understand the myriad ways in which we are related to the 
earth, and to one another.
  Now, perhaps more than any time in my recollection, that call to 
engage with one another, identify our commonalities, eschew clinging to 
our differences, and help--how we can, where we can--feels vital to the 
moral health of the American people and the long-term viability of our 
global environment.
  On behalf of the Eastern Orthodox Christian community of Southwestern 
Connecticut, I would like to extend my congratulations to His All-
Holiness for his Templeton Prize; it is a well-deserved acknowledgement 
of his years of advocacy. I hope his trip is a success and that he 
enjoys his time in the United States.
as a Vice Co-Chair of the Hellenic Caucus and 
a proud Greek-American, I rise today to welcome His All-Holiness 
Bartholomew I, Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople, to the United 
States, the spiritual leader of the Orthodox Christian community around 
the world. His All-Holinesss visit to Washington, D.C. and New York is 
yet another demonstration of his commitment to peace, his see, and the 
millions of Orthodox Christians in the United States.
  Born Demetrios Arhondonis in 1940 on the island of Imvros (today, 
Gokceada, Turkey), His All-Holiness Bartholomew was elected in October 
1991 as the 270th Archbishop of the 2000-year-old Church founded by the 
Apostle Andrew. His formal office is Archbishop of Constantinople-New 
Rome and Ecumenical Patriarch, a historic title dating to the sixth 
century. The Ecumenical Patriarch received his elementary and secondary 
education in Imvros and Istanbul. After completing undergraduate 
studies at the historic Theological School of Halki, he pursued 
graduate studies at the Pontifical Oriental Institute of the Gregorian 
University in Rome (Italy), the Ecumenical Institute in Bossey 
(Switzerland), and the University of Munich (Germany). His doctoral 
dissertation, submitted to the University of Athens (Greece), was in 
the field of Canon Law, and he was a founding member of the Society of 
Canon Law of the Oriental Churches. Ordained to the Diaconate in 1961 
and to the Priesthood in 1969, he served as Assistant Dean at the 
Theological School of Halki (1968 to 1972) before his appointment as 
Personal Secretary to the late Ecumenical Patriarch Demetrios (1972 to 
1990) as well as his election as Metropolitan of Philadelphia (1973) 
and, subsequently, Metropolitan of Chalcedon (1990).
  His see, the Ecumenical Patriarchate, once possessed holdings as vast 
as the Vatican but has been reduced to a small, besieged enclave in a 
decaying corner of Istanbul called the Phanar (Lighthouse). Almost all 
of its property has been seized by successive Turkish governments, its 
schools have been closed, and its prelates are taunted by extremists 
who demonstrate almost daily outside the Patriarchate, calling for its 
ouster from Turkey. The Patriarch himself is often jeered and 
threatened when he ventures outside his walled enclave. He is 
periodically burned in effigy by Turkish chauvinists. Petty bureaucrats 
take pleasure in harassing him, summoning him to their offices to 
question him about irrelevant issues, blocking his efforts to make 
repairs in the few buildings still under his control, and issuing 
veiled threats about what he says and does when he travels abroad. The 
Turkish government as a whole follows a policy that deliberately 
beIittles him, refusing to recognize his ecumenical status as the 
spiritual leader of a major religious faith.
  In September 1955, when Bartholomew was studying in Istanbul, he 
witnessed a massive pogrom against the citys Greek neighborhoods that 
left them looking ``like the bombed parts of London during the Second 
World War, as one British journalist reported. While the police 
``stood idly by or cheered on the mob, according to a report of the 
U.S. consul, 4,000 Greek shops and 2,000 homes were sacked and 
plundered, 38 churches were burned to the ground and 35 more 
desecrated, and 52 schools were destroyed. More than a dozen people 
were killed and scores were injured during the riots, beginning a cycle 
of violence and intimidation that has seen Istanbuls Greek population 
reduced from 200,000 when the riots erupted to less than 2,000 today.
  At a time when hostility and misunderstanding between the Christian 
and Muslim worlds have reached a deadly standoff, Patriarch 
Bartholomew, who speaks seven languages including Turkish, has made a 
deliberate effort to reach out to Muslims throughout the Middle East. 
``It is our strong belief that Orthodox Christians have a special 
responsibility to assist East-West rapprochement, he noted. ``For, 
like the Turkish Republic, we have a foot in both worlds. Pointing 
out that Orthodox Christians have a 550-year history of co-existence 
with Muslims in the Middle East, he has initiated a series of meetings 
with Muslim leaders throughout the region in what he calls ``a dialogue 
of loving truth. To strengthen that dialogue, he has traveled to 
Libya, Syria, Egypt, Iran, Jordan, Azerbaijan, Qatar, and Bahrain, and 
met political and religious figures in those countries, whom no other 
Christian hierarch has ever visited. As a result, the Patriarch has 
created more bridges between Christianity and Islam than any other 
prominent Christian leader.
  The Patriarchs concerns are not just limited to interfaith conflicts 
but have expanded to embrace all of Gods creation. He has shown such 
concern for the environment that he has become widely known as ``the 
Green Patriarch. He famously declared shortly after he assumed the 
ecumenical throne in 1991 that ``crime against the natural world is a 
sin. Human beings and the environment, he stated, ``compose a 
seamless garment of existence, a multicolored cloth, which we believe 
to be woven in its entirety by God. The world, he told a 1997 
conference of environmentalists in Santa Barbara, California, ``is not 
ours to use for our own convenience. It is Gods gift of love to us, 
and we must return his love by protecting it and all that is in it.
  To back up his words with action, Bartholomew launched a series of 
initiatives to raise worldwide concern for the environment. In 1992 he 
proposed to all Orthodox churches that September 1st be celebrated as a 
special day of prayer for the environment. In 1995 he started a series 
of environmental conferences, inviting prominent scientists, political 
leaders, theologians, ecologists, and journalists to embark on weeklong 
trips to examine the destruction that pollution has caused on major 
waters. Designed to draw international attention to the ecological 
degradation of the areas they visit, five such floating conferences 
have taken place in the past decade to the Black Sea, the Aegean, the 
Adriatic, the Baltic and the Danube River. For his work to combat 
pollution, the Patriarch was chosen in 2002 to receive Norways Sophie 
Prize, the most important international award given for leadership on 
the environment. He donated the $100,000 prize money to the poor 
children of Ethiopia, Greece, and Turkey. ``We are losing time, 
Bartholomew warned while accepting the award, ``and the more we wait, 
the more difficult and irreparable the damage.
  Although his efforts have brought him little relief from his problems 
in Turkey, they have been recognized around the world, including by the 
U.S. Congress, which gave him its highest award, the Congressional Gold 
Medal, in a ceremony in the Capitol. ``The greatest lesson about 
America lies under this magnificent dome, he told the assembled 
legislators. ``The Pentagon embodies might, but the Capitol embodies 
right. In these halls, different points of view meet and are reconciled 
. . . And--most important to the Orthodox Church during many dark 
ages--in these halls human rights are preserved and human dignity is 
enhanced.
  Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew is a leading figure in the dialogues 
of the Abrahamic Faiths--Judaism, Christianity, and Islam, and his 
presence in Washington, D.C. is an extraordinary opportunity to 
highlight the positive role that religious leaders of his stature bring 
to the myriad causes we in Congress grapple with each day.
  In addition to welcoming His All-Holiness to the United States and 
recognizing his lifetime of service and commitment to peace, I also ask 
that the House join me in congratulating Patriarch Bartholomew for 
receiving this years Templeton Prize. Established in 1972, the 
Templeton Prize honors individuals whose exemplary achievements advance 
Sir John Templetons philanthropic vision: harnessing the power of the 
sciences to explore the deepest questions of the universe and 
humankinds place and purpose within it. At this years ceremony, His 
All-Holiness will be honored for ``pioneering efforts to bridge 
scientific and spiritual understandings of humanitys relationship with 
faiths to heed a call for stewardship of creation.
  It is my hope that His All-Holinesss trip is not only a resounding 
success, but brings with it a message for all of us as legislators to 
recommit ourselves to complementing his vital work of building bridges, 
protecting Gods creation, and advancing the cause of peace around the 
world.
I rise today with great honor to welcome to 
our Nations Capital His All-Holiness Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew, 
Archbishop of Constantinople-New Rome and Ecumenical Patriarch. He is 
the Spiritual Head of the Orthodox Christian Church worldwide and 
shepherd to over 300 million faithful. For Orthodox Christians across 
the globe, including many of my own constituents in Northwest Ohio, His 
All-Holiness is not only their spiritual father but also a guiding 
light for interfaith understanding, religious freedom, and 
environmental stewardship.
  Part of his visit to the United States is to receive the 
distinguished Templeton Prize in New York City. This recognition, 
bestowed previously on figures such as Mother Teresa, the Dalai Lama, 
and Archbishop Desmond Tutu, acknowledges his lifetime of service in 
advancing the harmony of faith and reason, and his courageous 
leadership on behalf of peace and the protection of Gods creation.
  His All-Holiness is no stranger to the halls of Congress. On his 
first visit to our Nations Capital in 1997, he was awarded the 
Congressional Gold Medal in the Rotunda, where he delivered an address 
that remains a touchstone in the history of religious freedom and 
international dialogue. Through subsequent visits under both Democratic 
and Republican administrations, the Ecumenical Patriarch has been 
received with the highest honors by our Nations leaders.
  For more than three decades as Ecumenical Patriarch, His All-Holiness 
has been a bridge-builder between peoples and nations. He has convened 
leaders of the Abrahamic faiths in pursuit of peace and reconciliation. 
He has boldly raised the conscience of the world to the urgent moral 
imperative of environmental responsibility. For these efforts, he is 
rightly known as the ``Green Patriarch. He has also been a steadfast 
advocate for human rights and religious liberty across the globe, 
strengthening the cause of freedom for all people.
  On behalf of the people of Northwest Ohio, and especially our vibrant 
Greek Orthodox community, I am proud to extend our heartfelt welcome to 
His All-Holiness Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew as he returns to 
Washington. We rejoice in his recognition with the Templeton Prize, and 
we pray that his ministry of peace, love, and reconciliation will 
continue to inspire our Nation and our world.
I would like to recognize and welcome to 
Washington, His All-Holiness Bartholomew Archbishop of Constantinople-
New Rome and Ecumenical Patriarch, the spiritual leader of Orthodox 
Christianity worldwide. As the Archbishop of Constantinople-New Rome, 
His All-Holiness serves as the spiritual head of the second largest 
Christian Church in the world.
  His All-Holiness Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew was elected in 
October 1991 as the 270th Archbishop of the 2,000-year-old Church 
founded by the Apostle Andrew. For more than three decades, he has 
stood at the forefront of the cause of religious freedom, interfaith 
dialogue, and peacebuilding, making him the longest-serving Archbishop 
of Constantinople in the history of Christianity.
  Born Demetrios Arhondonis in 1940 on an island in Turkey, His All-
Holiness Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew pursued theological studies 
in Rome, Switzerland, Germany, and Greece before joining leadership 
within the Church. He is fluent in numerous languages and has been 
recognized by academic institutions worldwide, holding honorary 
doctorates from universities across Europe, the United States, and 
beyond.
  Throughout his tenure, His All-Holiness Ecumenical Patriarch 
Bartholomew has worked to advance religious liberty and human rights, 
to strengthen ties among Christian denominations, and to build 
relationships among the Abrahamic religions: Judaism, Christianity, and 
Islam. He has co-sponsored international peace conferences, supported 
reconciliation in conflict-ridden regions, and spoken out for 
persecuted groups across the globe.
  His All-Holiness Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew is no stranger to 
our Nations Capitol. In 1997, during his first official visit as His 
All-Holiness, he was awarded the Congressional Gold Medal in a ceremony 
in the U.S. Capitol Rotunda. On that occasion, he reminded us that, 
``The Pentagon embodies might, but the Capitol embodies right. In these 
halls different points of view meet and are reconciled. . . And most 
important to the Orthodox Church during many dark ages--in these halls 
human rights are preserved and human dignity is enhanced.
  This week, His All-Holiness Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew will 
return to Washington as part of his visit to the United States, where 
he will also receive the distinguished Templeton Prize in New York 
City, an award previously bestowed upon Mother Teresa, the Dalai Lama, 
and Archbishop Desmond Tutu. This honor recognizes his lifelong 
commitment to faith, peace, and science.
, it is fitting that we welcome His All-Holiness 
Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew back to Washington, D.C. and recognize 
his remarkable contributions as a global religious leader, peacemaker, 
and advocate for freedom. His presence is a reminder of the enduring 
values of faith, dialogue, and human dignity.