I rise today to commemorate a life well 
lived. Im saddened to announce the passing of an American hero, 
retired U.S. Navy Commander Allan Randolph (``Randy) Topp. Im 
honored to help tell his story because I think its a life that should 
be memorialized in these hallowed halls, and we here in Congress 
sometimes need reminding of what it is to lead a life well lived.
  Born in 1953 in Atlanta, GA, Randy was known for his playful glimmer 
throughout his childhood. He decided to attend Vanderbilt University 
and graduated in 1975 with a double major in Economics and Latin 
American Studies. After graduating, he began a 20-year career as an 
officer in the U.S. Navy piloting P-3 Orions, serving on the USS 
Constellation, and leading Training Squadron Six (VT-6) as its 
Executive Officer and Commanding Officer. He retired from military 
service with the rank of Commander in 1996, but his professional life 
was far from over. Randy continued his career with the Raytheon Company 
in Tucson, AZ, before fully retiring in 2018 to spend more time with 
his family.
  Throughout his career, Randy was a lifetime learner. He continued his 
education beyond the undergraduate level and received not 1, but 3 
masters degrees: the first, an MBA from the University of New 
Hampshire, the second, an MS in Electrical Engineering, and the third, 
an MS in Systems Technology (Space Systems Operations) from the Naval 
Postgraduate School in Monterey, CA. He is even a named inventor on 
multiple patents from his time with Raytheon.
  What the accolades and accomplishments dont tell us is just how much 
of a positive effect Randy had on those around him. Upon hearing of his 
passing, one of his Navy shipmates commented, ``Randy was . . . a great 
pilot, but also 1 of the fun guys every group needs to keep everything 
in perspective and moving together. I met him again years later while 
with Raytheon, and he was still the same great guy . . . Truly a man to 
be admired; Im happy to have known him.
  This same spirit carried through to his time with his grandchildren, 
with whom he was excited to experience life. He introduced them to

new adventures like horseback riding, whitewater rafting, visiting the 
rodeo, and attending cowboy cookouts. He appreciated the lifestyle of 
Tucson, hosting family and friends to introduce them to the Sonoran 
Desert culture, including enjoying the occasional Sonoran hot dog.
  Fair winds and following seas, Commander Topp. I thank him for his 
service to his family, to his friends and shipmates, and to this 
Nation. We are forever grateful to him for providing an example of what 
it means to live life to the fullest.
I rise today to recognize the Stotlar Pharmacy 
of Pinckneyville, Illinois, for its over 90 years of service to Perry 
County residents. This is a true American success story: a family owned 
and operated small business in the heart of one of the regions best 
small cities.
  Stotlar Pharmacy was founded in 1932 by Joe Stotlar. At the time of 
its founding, the Stotlar Pharmacy not only filled prescriptions, but 
had a soda fountain, sold toiletries, gifts, film, cameras, similar to 
what many would consider an ``old time drug store.
  In the 1960s, the pharmacy saw many changes, which included moving 
across the street from their original location, and now offering 
pharmacy services, delivery, and a gift shop.
  Joe Stotlars sons, Jim and Gene, were physicians with offices close 
by as they assisted in overseeing the store after their father. The 
family tradition continues today with Joes grandchildren: Bill, 
Barbara, Tom, and Rich. His grandchildren are now serving as the proud 
owners and managers of Stotlar Pharmacy.
  Joes family remembers him as a very good businessman who was willing 
to help out anyone in their time of need. With all the Stotlar family 
has given to our community, I am proud to now give them the recognition 
they deserve.
, please join me in recognizing the Stotlar Pharmacy for 
all they do to keep Southern Illinoisans happy and healthy. We are 
fortunate to have such strong family businesses in Southern Illinois, 
something that should inspire the next generation of community leaders 
to come.
I rise to honor the service and 
accomplishments of Andres Sada, my intern who is transitioning from my 
office to continue his mission.
  A Florida native with Panamanian origins, Andres came to my office 
ready to impact the American legislative system. While in my office, 
Andres has pushed my agendas to great lengths--from drafting memos, to 
organizing information, and researching data.
  In our time together, I have recognized that Andres is a force in 
policy. His passion has been powerful over the semester as we have 
fought for the lives of underserved and disadvantaged communities. His 
commitment to international affairs has led Andres to organizing events 
regarding Latin American Politics at the George Washington University. 
Andres has successfully piloted the first GW Pride MUN conference for 
Out in International Affairs. Andres has and will continue to make a 
difference and leave his mark on public policy as he continues to fight 
for a better system.
  On behalf of Floridas 24th Congressional District, I ask my 
colleagues to join me in honoring Andres Sada for his exemplary 
accomplishments, dedication to public service, and trailblazing 
leadership.
I rise today to honor Mr. 
Jack Ding, a renowned member of our community who has been chosen to 
receive the prestigious American Dream Award for Californias Fourth 
Congressional District. This award honors immigrants who have excelled 
professionally, through entrepreneurship and innovation, in the arts 
and culture, or through community service. Mr. Dings exceptional 
leadership and advocacy makes him a very deserving recipient of this 
recognition and award.
, where he received a diploma for 
electrical engineering. He immigrated to the United States in 1993 to 
study at Dominican University, working his way through school to 
receive a Masters in Business Administration. He became a United 
States Citizen in 2008 and moved to the City of Sonoma, where he became 
a vital member of the community through his advocacy and 
entrepreneurship.
a tax practitioner for the Internal 
Revenue Service in 2007. He then opened his small business, Unicom Tax 
Services, with a focus on tax representation. In 2010, he helped 
establish a free tax clinic at La Luz Center in Sonoma. He has served 
on the Sonoma Valley Citizens Advisory Commission and is currently 
serving on the Sonoma City Council. Mr. Ding has been a champion for 
the interests of California taxpayers. Mr. Ding is a member of the 
National Association of Enrolled Agents, and has been an outspoken 
advocate for taxpayers, traveling to the United States Capitol on 
multiple occasions to advocate to amend the Tax Cut and Jobs Act and 
most recently to increase the IRS funding and tax reform.
2022, 
becoming the first Asian American to hold this office. Mr. Ding 
regularly engages with immigrant groups, encouraging people to be 
active participants in local and national politics. In the aftermath of 
the COVID-19 pandemic, Mr. Dings utilized the American Rescue Plan and 
fiscal policy to increase Sonomas reserve funds by $3 million. In 
addition, he has led fundraising efforts for a pavilion to honor local 
Chinese laborers contribution to the local wine industry. In response 
to the Russian invasion of Ukraine, Mr. Ding hosted a press conference 
with the Ukrainian Counsel General to condemn the invasion and helped 
raise over $150,000 for Ukraine Sister City.
, Mr. Dings advocacy, and service as an elected official 
have greatly enriched the Sonoma community. His readiness

to help others is evident in his impactful work in the district and on 
Capitol Hill. It is therefore fitting and proper that we honor him here 
today with the American Dream Award.
I rise to recognize the Nations community 
supervision professionals, who are dedicated public servants and 
perform many vital roles in their work with justice-involved adults and 
juveniles. They identify opportunities and services to help individuals 
successfully contribute to society, while holding them accountable for 
their actions. They remain mindful of their role in protecting public 
safety.
  In honor of Pretrial, Probation and Parole Supervision Week 2023, we 
salute all those who have chosen this important career. In the District 
of Columbia, we especially thank the employees of the Court Services 
and Offender Supervision Agency for the District of Columbia (CSOSA) 
and the Pretrial Services Agency for the District of Columbia (PSA) for 
their service. CSOSA and PSA are models of excellence in community 
supervision. Their work reflects the theme of Pretrial, Probation and 
Parole Supervision Week 2023, ``Stronger Together.
  Community supervision agencies are valuable partners of other 
government agencies, nonprofits, neighborhood-based groups and all who 
strive to make our nation safer and stronger. We extend our gratitude 
to them and encourage all people to recognize their many achievements 
as we proclaim July 16-22, 2023, Pretrial, Probation and Parole 
Supervision Week 2023.
I rise today to recognize the contributions 
to the Fannin County community by Sandy Barber. For over 22 years, Mrs. 
Barber has served as the Executive Director of the Fannin County 
Childrens Center, and she has over 31 years of experience in the 
nonprofit and child welfare sectors.
  A native of Arlington, Mrs. Barber graduated from Austin College in 
Sherman, Texas. Her passion for child welfare services originates from 
her longtime desire to help put an end to the victims of abuse. Under 
her leadership, Fannin County Childrens Center has expanded its 
community programs and outreach to assist children who have been abused 
and neglected. Some of these efforts include expanding mental health 
services, offering emergency resources and providing clothing. Mrs. 
Barber also oversaw the purchase and renovation of their current 
facility in Bonham, Texas.
  Moreover, Mrs. Barber has served on the board for Texas Court 
Appointed Special Advocates and the Childrens Advocacy Centers of 
Texas. To recognize her outstanding work, she was named the Texoma 
Regional Citizen of the Year and Bonham Citizen of the Year. Mrs. 
Barber also received the Athena Leadership Award and the Angels in 
Adoption Award in 2019. Im confident that many young people have been 
inspired by Mrs. Barbers efforts and have no doubt that they will 
follow her footsteps to help prevent horrific acts of child abuse.
  I have requested the United States flag to be flown over our Nations 
Capitol to recognize Mrs. Barbers important contributions to the 
children of North Texas. May God Bless her.
I rise today, along with my colleagues 
Congressman Jim Costa and Congressman Raul Grijalva, to pay tribute to 
our long-time friend and advisor Michael Fraioli, who passed away after 
a courageous battle with leukemia.
  Mike was a devoted husband and father and is survived by his wife of 
27 years, Carol Eickert, his beloved children Michelle and Matthew, and 
his brother Tom. A Central Valley kid, Mike was born in Modesto, 
California and was a long-time resident of Chevy Chase, MD. After 
working in his hometown of Modesto on the successful campaign electing 
Tony Coelho to the U.S. House of Representatives, Mike moved to 
Washington, D.C. to begin his long and successful career in politics as 
a strong Democrat.
  Mike was the founder and owner of Fraioli &amp; Associates, where he 
advised some of the highest-level Democrats in Congress and was a vocal 
advocate for a variety of labor organizations including IAMAW, IBEW, 
and AFL-CIO. Mike made an indelible impact on both my political journey 
and my life. I had the honor to work with Mike since 1996, a few months 
before I was elected to Congress. I spent thousands of hours with Mike 
over a period of 27 years--and I enjoyed every hour.
  As I reflect on Mikes life, I am reminded of his unyielding belief 
in the power of organizing and the necessity of empowering individuals 
to shape their own futures. He was a tremendous advocate and friend. 
His passing leaves a void not only in the realm of politics but in the 
hearts of all who had the honor of knowing him.
  We would like to extend our sincerest condolences to Mikes wife 
Carol, and his children Michelle and Matthew.
I rise today to congratulate the Delta 
Cardiff Volunteer Fire Company (DCVFC) on the occasion of the 25th 
Anniversary of the Mason Dixon Fair.
  In 1998, following the Delta Cardiff Volunteer Fire Company Carnival, 
thanks to the leadership of Delta Cardiff Volunteer Fire Company 
President Doug Farrington, the community came together to transform 
their annual carnival into a Pennsylvania-sanctioned State Fair. Land 
was purchased and building infrastructure was created to host the 
inaugural Mason Dixon Fair on July 12-17, 1999.
  The fairs first year was held in acclaim by residents of 
Pennsylvania and Maryland, and this success has continued over the 
years. The leadership of the fair changed following the passing of 
Chief Doug Farrington in 2010, and for the next twelve years Fire 
Company Chief Jeff Griffith continued to build upon the fairs success. 
Now, Vice President Derek Macomber and his wife Becky lead the fair 
with assistance from numerous dedicated community volunteers.
  Communities across the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania have been built 
stronger thanks to the volunteer contributions of those who donate 
their time and talents to put on State Fairs, and that is true of the 
Mason Dixon Fair in Delta, Pennsylvania.
  As they celebrate their 25th anniversary this year, I want to 
congratulate and thank all the fair volunteers, community members, and 
organizations including the brave and selfless members of the Delta 
Cardiff Volunteer Fire Company who have worked to make the Mason Dixon 
Fair a fun and successful community event. I wish them all continued 
success in the years to come.
due to a family obligation, I was unable to 
attend session on June 23, 2023. Had I been present, I would have voted 
NAY on rollcall No. 287, NAY on rollcall No. 288, and YEA on rollcall 
No. 289.
I rise today in support of my Boosting Long-
Term U.S. Engagement in the Pacific (BLUE Pacific) Act, co-introduced 
with my Pacific Islands Caucus Colleagues Congresswoman Radewagen, 
Congressman Bera and Congressman Sherman.
  This bill directs a comprehensive and sustained approach to U.S. 
engagement in the Pacific Islands, a critical part of the broader Indo-
Pacific where much of the future of the world is being charted.
  The lands and waters of the jurisdictions spread across Melanesia, 
Micronesia and Polynesia comprise an area larger than the land areas of 
China and Russia combined and represent a major portion of the vast 
Pacific Ocean and our Earths surface. The peoples of these islands 
have developed their own proud cultures and identity over millennia, 
and for centuries now have shared historic, cultural, economic and 
strategic ties with the United States. Tens of thousands of U.S. and 
allied servicemembers died throughout the Pacific Islands in World War 
Two defending the common values shared between our country and the 
Pacific Islands. Our presents and futures are entwined; they are being 
and will be determined jointly.

  Last years U.S.-Pacific Islands Summit in Washington and the 
Strategy for Pacific Partnership released at that summit built on prior 
versions of our BLUE Pacific Act first introduced by our Pacific 
Islands Caucus in 2019. They represented a confirmation of our shared 
histories and path and a full re-engagement on all fronts with the 
Pacific Islands.
  Our BLUE Pacific Act reintroduced today updates our prior versions to 
account for portions already enacted through other vehicles as well as 
the U.S.-Pacific Islands Summit. It supports the tenets of the Pacific 
Islands Forums 2050 Strategy for the Blue Pacific Continent, ensuring 
that our efforts are fully responsive to and synchronized with the 
expressed direction and needs of the Pacific Islands nations. It 
specifically codifies the Strategy for Pacific Partnership and requires 
updates to the strategy every four years. It also includes language 
encouraging the allocation of more staff to the Pacific Islands, and 
the facilitation of U.S. support for trade capacity building, 
environmental change mitigation, education, civil society engagement 
and security training.
  These further initiatives support the significant strides we have 
made in recent years towards fully reengaging the Pacific Islands 
region across a range of common values and interests and in response to 
specific Pacific Islands needs. In this moment, as the Pacific Islands 
recover from the health and economic impacts of the pandemic and are 
confronted with increased environmental, security and other challenges, 
this re-engagement is vital. Our bill says to the Pacific Islands that 
the United States is a partner they can trust and rely upon over the 
long term.
  For these reasons, I ask that my colleagues support our bill. Mahalo 
(thank you).
ASSISTED LIVING AND MEMORY CARE TO THE PEOPLE OF COLORADOS FOURTH 
                              of colorado
I rise to acknowledge the opening of The 
Capstone at Centerra Senior Living in Loveland, Colorado. Capstone at 
Centerra is a leader in innovative housing and medical solutions for 
seniors in Colorados Fourth District. As an organization, Capstone 
serves its residents at every stage of the aging process, providing 
assisted living, memory care, and respite care designed to encourage 
independence and support individuals with personalized care.
  Colorado is one of the fastest aging states in the Nation, and by 
2040, 1 in 4 Coloradoans will be over the age of 60. With a rapidly 
aging population and a shortage of assisted living facilities and 
memory care services there is a critical need for more facilities, like 
Capstone, especially in rural areas like the Eastern Plains.
  Organizations who face the healthcare crisis head-on and continue to 
provide high-quality, personalized, and innovative care deserve to be 
recognized and supported.
  I am proud to recognize the Capstone at Centerra for improving the 
quality of life for seniors in Northern Colorado. I hope that their 
perseverance in advancing care will inspire other communities to 
provide continued, personalized housing and medical care for older 
adults.
I rise today to recognize Vivian Litchard, 
a resident of Ypsilanti, Michigan on the occasion of her 100th 
birthday. Her lifetime of service to her family and to her Nation is 
worthy of commendation.
  Raised right down the road in Belleville, Vivian and many other young 
women began working at the Willow Run Bomber Plant in Ypsilanti, 
Michigan in February of 1942. Eighteen years old and fresh out of high 
school, the women of the Sewing Department worked 54 hours a week hand 
sewing the covers of the B-24 Liberator bombers ailerons, rudders, and 
elevators. It took a couple months for her to see the first completed 
bomber roll off the line, but soon the Willow Run Bomber Plant would be 
producing a completed plane every hour. After the war ended, most 
everyone was sent home. Shortly thereafter, the plant was sold and 
became the Kaiser Frazer car factory. Vivian said ``I realized that I 
had grown up at the bomber plant in the 3\1/2\ years that I worked 
there and when Kaiser Frazer asked many of the wartime plant workers 
to come back, Vivian answered the call by driving the cars off the line 
and parking them in the lot.
  After the war, Vivian met and married her husband, Lyle, who served 
in the Signal Corps during the war in North Africa, Sicily, and Italy. 
Together they had a full and extraordinary life. They raised three 
children and traveled the world, with the only continent they failed to 
visit being Antarctica. Their legacy now includes six grandchildren, 
eight great-grandchildren, and two great-great-grandchildren. After 
Lyles death in 1995, Vivian visited Europe with her seniors group, 
specifically the beaches of Normandy. This made the war much more real 
to her, and she became very involved with her fellow Rosies, including 
an Honor Flight out to the capital in 2016.
, I ask my colleagues to join me today in celebrating the 
100th birthday of Vivian Litchard, a woman who answered the call of 
duty at the tender age of 18 and served our country with dignity in its 
darkest hours. Though she may say ``It really wasnt a big deal, its 
just what we all did, we know that without the skilled workers 
assembling B-24 Liberators in Willow Run, the result of the war may 
have been much different. We thank her for her service, and wish her 
much laughter and blessings in her 101st year. I thank Vivian.
I rise today to remember a devoted public 
servant and dear friend, former Tennessee State Senator Roy Herron, who 
died on Saturday after injuries sustained in a jet ski accident at the 
age of 69.
  Roy was a multi-faceted man of the people--a lawyer and Methodist 
minister, who served in the state House and Senate for 26 years and was 
the Democratic nominee for the 8th Congressional District in 2010. He 
also wrote three books about the role of faith in politics and a fourth 
book about Tennessee political humor, co-authored with his friend 
Cotton Ivy.
  A gifted politician, Roy was first elected to the Tennessee House of 
Representatives in 1986 to fill the seat vacated when Ned McWherter 
became governor. He served in the House in the 95th through 99th 
Tennessee General Assemblies and in the Senate in the 100th through 
107th, where he served as floor leader and then chairman of the Senate 
Democratic Caucus. He was my Senate colleague from 1997 until I left 
the state Senate and came to Congress in 2007. He also chaired the 
Select Committee on Children and Youth, the Senate General Welfare, 
Health and Human Resources Committee, and the Joint Tenncare Oversight 
Committee. He was a member of the Senate Finance, Ways and Means 
Committee, the Senate Government Operations Committee, the Joint 
Committee on Charitable Gaming, and the Joint Select Committee on 
Education.
  I was hopeful that we would be colleagues in Washington when he 
declared his candidacy for Congress in 2009 after John Tanner announced 
his retirement. Roy campaigned throughout the 8th District in his old 
red Ford pickup. Despite receiving the endorsement of every major 
Tennessee newspaper, he lost the general election to Stephen Fincher, a 
cotton farmer who refused to debate him, as Tennessee took a hard right 
turn. In 2011, he was seriously injured in a bicycling accident while 
training for an Iron Man competition. He later served as chairman of 
the Tennessee Democratic Party from 2013 to 2015.
  Roy graduated at the top of his class at the University of Tennessee 
at Martin in 1975 and was chosen as a Rotary Scholar and spent a year 
studying religion at the University of St. Andrews in Scotland. 
Returning to Tennessee, he received both a masters degree in Divinity 
and a J.D. from Vanderbilt University in 1980.
  Besides his accomplishments and dedication to public service, Roy 
will be remembered as a truly nice guy. I extend my deepest condolences 
to his wife Nancy and his sons John, Rick and Ben, and his many friends 
and supporters. His was a life well lived, and he will be missed.