I rise today to honor Apostle Albert D. 
Wilson, Jr. of The Greater Royal Worship Center on his 13th pastoral 
anniversary. A devoted man of God and a remarkable leader, Apostle 
Wilson has uplifted our community through his faith.
  Apostle Wilson began his service to the church at the young age of 
six. He became an ordained minister in the early 2000s. In 2011, under 
the guidance of his grandfather, Apostle Wilson was appointed as the 
pastor of the church. Later, in 2019, he embraced the Lords call and 
was installed as an Apostle.
  Throughout his service, Apostle Wilson has expanded the churchs 
reach and spread his message of faith throughout the community. He 
renamed the church to the Greater Royal Worship Center, inspired by the 
vision of his forefathers. Continuing to build out the churchs 
community engagement, Apostle Wilson established the Royal Body Shop 
Outreach Ministries in Albion, New York. Above all, Apostle Wilson 
leads with the principle of the three Ls--We love, we lift, and we 
liberate.
  In addition to his pastoral work, Apostle Wilson has dedicated 
himself to serving our community in multiple capacities. He is the 
director of the Martha Mitchell Community Center, which provides 
Buffalo residents with vital resources and services. During the COVID-
19 pandemic, Apostle Wilson led efforts to combat vaccine 
misinformation and hosted numerous vaccination clinics at the center. 
Further, Apostle Wilson has been a leading figure with Voice Buffalo, 
participating in rallies calling for police reform. Standing alongside 
other faith-based leaders and community activists, Apostle Wilson 
called for unity and protection of all people.
  Today, Apostle Wilson is a loving husband to his wife, Ykeeta Wilson, 
and a father to his seven children. Please join me in congratulating 
Apostle Albert D. Wilson, Jr. on thirteen years of pastoral service and 
celebrating his remarkable dedication to his faith and service to the 
community.
I rise today to recognize the #OneWorld 
Soccer Tournament of WNY, an incredible community initiative led by the 
Buffalo Maendeleo Soccer Club and Bridges from Borders. This inaugural 
event brought together underrepresented youth in Buffalos Lower West 
Side for a soccer competition.
  The organizations leading this project, the Buffalo Maendeleo Soccer 
Club and Bridges from Borders, work to support our local refugee and 
immigrant populations. The Buffalo Maendeleo Soccer Club provides safe 
community spaces for underserved children to play in a soccer league 
with their peers. Bridges from Borders is a nonprofit organization 
promoting mental health and wellbeing for immigrant families moving to 
Western New York.
  Together, these organizations dedicated nine months to organizing the 
#OneWorld Soccer Tournament, with the goal of fostering unity and 
combating negative stereotypes placed onto minorities. The tournament 
took place on Saturday, July 13, 2024, with four teams competing in 
spirited and fun soccer games. Parents and players alike had a great 
time engaging in friendly competition and connecting with their 
community.
  Following the tournaments great success, Maendeleo Soccer Club and 
Bridges from Borders plan to make the #OneWorld Tournament an annual 
event. They hope to expand their programming to more neighborhoods, 
continuing to bring young people together and build unity through 
soccer.
  Please join me in congratulating the Buffalo Maendeleo Soccer Club 
and Bridges from Borders on the incredible success of the #OneWorld 
Soccer Tournament. Today, we thank these organizations for their 
dedication to serving our community and uplifting our youth.
I rise to recognize Winners Church of 
Dumfries, Virginia and extend my congratulations to them on the 
completion of their new church building. This expansion will enable 
them to continue their mission of service to the community.
  Winners Church has served the people of Virginias Seventh 
Congressional District for more than 13 years. Under the direction of 
Senior Pastor Henry Godwin, Winners Church has enriched the lives of 
Dumfries residents by fostering a sense of community and providing 
invaluable support to their congregants. This new building serves as a 
symbol of the continued dedication to service that Winners Church 
nurtures in their community and will continue to grow through their 
love and faith.
  The mission of Winners Church is to be a place where overcomers are 
raised, hope is restored, purpose is realized, and potential is 
maximized. Since the churchs founding in December of 2010, they have 
continuously provided for their community through annual events such as 
the turkey giveaway, back to school giveaway, tissue drive, and 
quarterly visits to shelters and assisted living homes throughout 
Dumfries. I applaud Pastor Godwin and the entire Winners Church family 
for their tireless work to develop a welcoming environment for the 
people of Dumfries and beyond, and for the support they have provided 
to our community.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in celebrating Winners 
Church on the opening of their new house of worship. This remarkable 
achievement is a testament to their unwavering dedication and their 
deep commitment to serving the people of Dumfries, Virginia.
CELEBRATING THE TEN-YEAR ANNIVERSARY OF ICES PLAIN &amp; FANCY ICE CREAM 
                              of missouri
I rise today, along with the people of St. 
Louis, to honor and celebrate the ten-year anniversary of Ices Plain &amp; 
Fancy Ice Cream Parlor, a beloved institution in our community located 
in the Shaw neighborhood of St. Louis.
  Founded in 2014 by visionary entrepreneurs, Ices Plain &amp; Fancy has 
become a cornerstone of our local culinary scene, renowned for its 
innovative approach to ice cream making. By utilizing liquid nitrogen 
to craft their unique flavors, they offer not just a treat but an 
extraordinary experience for all who visit. It is with great pride that 
I recognize and celebrate the ten-year anniversary of Ices Plain &amp; 
Fancy Ice Cream Parlor.
  Over the past decade, Ices Plain &amp; Fancy has continually demonstrated 
a commitment to quality and creativity. Their dedication to sourcing 
local ingredients and supporting sustainable practices has garnered 
admiration and loyalty from their patrons. Ices Plain &amp; Fancy ice cream 
has brought many St. Louisans welcome respite on hot summer days. Their 
contributions to the local economy, culture, and culinary heritage 
cannot be overstated.
  As they celebrate this remarkable ten-year milestone, I extend my 
heartfelt congratulations to the entire team at Ices Plain &amp; Fancy. 
Their passion and hard walk have made a lasting impact on our 
community, and I look forward to seeing their continued success in the 
years to come.
I rise today to pay tribute to law 
enforcement men and women who have provided distinguished service to 
the people of Floridas 16th Congressional District.
  Law enforcement is a demanding profession that requires sacrifice, 
courage, and dedication to serve others. Every day, brave men and women 
put themselves in harms way to enforce the laws of our society and 
protect public safety. They deserve our gratitude and respect.
  Fourteen years ago, I established the 16th District Congressional Law 
Enforcement Awards to give special recognition to law enforcement 
officers, departments, or units for exceptional achievement.
  This year, I will present Congressional law enforcement awards to the 
following winners chosen by an independent panel comprised of current 
and retired law enforcement personnel representing a cross-section of 
the districts law enforcement community:
  Above and Beyond the Call of Duty Award: Lieutenant Nicholas Pruitt, 
Deputy Michael Ates, Deputy Althavia Brown, Deputy James Forkin, Deputy 
Christopher Houghton, and Detective Dwight Roberts of the Manatee 
County Sheriffs Office.
  Dedication and Professionalism Award: Officer Andrew Adkins of the 
Holmes Beach Police Department, Officer Kevin Williams of the Bradenton 
Police Department, Trooper Taylor Ledford of the Florida Highway 
Patrol, Corporal Benjamin Schlabach of the Palmetto Police Department, 
Detective Matthew Hostetler, Detective Steven Luke, and Detective 
Carmine Luper of the Manatee County Sheriffs Office.
  Gary Tibbetts Career Service Award: Major Todd Shear of the Manatee 
County Sheriffs Office, Captain (retired) William Knight and Detective 
Jeff Beckley of the Bradenton Police Department, and Special Agent 
(retired) Stephen Lieberman of the Florida Department of Law 
Enforcement.
  Preservation of Life Award: Sergeant Russell Ackerman of the 
Bradenton Police Department, Officer Specialist Kelsey Dalton of the 
Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission, Lieutenant Richard 
Rietz, Sergeant Randy Lamb, Sergeant Laszlo Nagy, Detective Eric Davis, 
Deputy Jake Essek, Deputy Joshua Groover, Deputy Brian Hart, Deputy 
Stanley Hartley, Deputy Brandon Howard, Deputy Lauren Jalowiec, Deputy 
Alexis Lyon, Deputy Robert Macchio, Deputy Paul McCartney, Deputy 
Humberto Noronha, Deputy Gregory Palso, Deputy Deborah Perry, Deputy 
Carrie Renninger, Deputy Patti Savageau, Deputy Hurly Smith, and Deputy 
Arturo Velasquez of the Manatee County Sheriffs Office.
  Unit Citation Award: Bradenton Police Department Narcotics Unit: 
Detective Eleazar Garcia and Detective Brandon Kells; Florida Highway 
Patrol Troop C Criminal Interdiction Unit: Sergeant Joshua Malloy, 
Trooper Jeremy Fields, Trooper Wesley Kelly, Trooper Deryck Lewis, 
Trooper Chris Nottingham, Trooper Sergio Pearce, Trooper Eric Schaub, 
K-9 Flip, K-9 Titan, and K-9 Lobo; Manatee County Sheriffs Office 
Fraud/Auto/Pawn Unit: Sergeant Jason Farrier, Detective Anthony Begley, 
Detective Joshua Breitwieser, Detective Gary Cummings III, Detective 
Samuel Ebeling, Detective Rachael Fossaceca, Detective Daniel Reyna, 
Detective Antonio Starnes, and Detective Randall Walker.
I rise today to honor my friend, Aldo 
Pineschi, Jr., who recently passed away in Roseville, California. His 
loss is felt throughout Northern California, and very personally to 
myself. My deepest condolences to his wife Lesli, their children, and 
to his extended family and many friends. Aldo was a quiet leader with 
tremendous influence, and also had a most caring spirit. There was 
little in Placer County that didnt have his wise advice and 
fingerprints on it. Aldo was a humble man who loved his community and 
did everything in his power to make it better. Never wanting to be in 
the limelight, he indeed was a light and help to dozens of charities, 
as well as encouraging all levels of government to come together to 
solve issues. Putting aside differences and finding areas of agreement 
was one of his specialties.
  I value and will cherish the friendship that I shared with Aldo and 
will look back fondly at the times, over dinners, local events, we 
shared. No matter how far he had to travel, Aldo would be there giving 
me a smile from the back of a crowded town hall or business round 
table.
  God Bless Aldo. I thank him for all he has done and the kindness that 
accompanied him every step on this earth. He will be missed.
I rise today to honor the life and service 
of Brigadier General John ``Pogo Pogorek, who was Commander of the 
New Hampshire Air National Guard (NHANG). On July 8, 2024, he was the 
victim of a tragic accident near his home in Rochester, New Hampshire. 
General Pogorek was a beloved father, husband, son, and brother who 
dedicated his life to service in both the Air Force and NHANG.
  Born in Ware, Massachusetts, General Pogorek received a Bachelor of 
Science in Human Factors Engineering from the United States Air Force 
Academy and was commissioned as an officer in 1989. He Joined NHANG in 
January 1999, serving in numerous leadership roles, including 
commanding the 157th Maintenance, Operations, and Air Refueling Wing 
Groups. General Pogorek was promoted to Commander of the NHANG in June 
2022 and served as the principal advisor to the Governor of New 
Hampshire.
  General Pogorek made a remarkable impact on New Hampshire and our 
country throughout his 35 years of service. During his career he logged 
over 6,000 flight hours piloting T-1, C-130, KC-135, and KC-46 
aircraft. He also helped design the KC-46 tail art and helped to bring 
back military airshows to New Hampshire. For his dedicated service, 
General Pogorek received accolades such as the Meritorious Service 
Medal with four oak leaf clusters, the Air Medal Aerial Achievement 
Medal with four oak leaf clusters, the Air Force Commendation Medal 
with oak leaf cluster, the AF Outstanding Unit Award, and several 
others. He was dedicated to the health and safety of everyone that is 
currently serving at Pease, and those that served there in the past, 
along with their families.
  General Pogorek was deeply devoted to his family, and in 2018, he and 
his beloved wife Whitney established Red Gate Farm. The family farm 
quickly grew into a heritage breed meat business, where General Pogorek 
transitioned his service and dedication from country to community. 
General Pogorek and his family developed relationships selling their 
meat to local farmers markets as he adapted to life as a farmer.
  General Pogoreks family and friends describe him as a kind, humble, 
funny, and resilient man. He had a passion for learning and inspired 
those around him, both within his career of service and outside of it. 
Those who knew General Pogorek recognized his dedication to his country 
and family, and admired his loyalty, kindness, and leadership. We are 
forever grateful for his selfless service and sacrifice.
  During this difficult time, my thoughts and condolences are with his 
wife Whitney, his children, Megan, Jacob, Jenna, Jason, and Jackson, 
his mother Mary, his siblings, Karen, Donna, Kevin, and Sandra, and all 
of General Pogoreks loved ones. On behalf of the constituents of New 
Hampshires First Congressional District, I commend General Pogorek for 
his exemplary service and sacrifice to our Nation. His legacy will 
endure, and he will be dearly missed.
INTRODUCTION OF THE INCREASED TRANSPARENCY IN 501(c)(4) ORGANIZATIONS 
                              ACT OF 2024
today, I introduce the Increased 
Transparency in 501(c)(4) Organizations Act of 2024. This bill would 
require the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) to make publicly available 
the forms organizations that self-declare under Section 501(c)(4) of 
the Internal Revenue Code (IRC) file with the IRS. Americans have the 
right to know which organizations are operating under this section of 
the IRC.
  To be eligible for tax-exempt status under 501(c)(4), organizations, 
often referred to as ``social welfare organizations, must be 
``devoted exclusively to charitable, educational, or recreational 
purposes. They can apply for 501(c)(4) status, or they can self-
declare. Previously, organizations seeking to self-declare were not 
required to notify the IRS of their existence. In 2015, however, the 
Protecting Americans from Tax Hikes Act of 2015 (PATH Act), which 
required an organization seeking to self-declare to file a notice with 
the IRS, was enacted into law. The PATH Act did not, however, make the 
filed notices, Form 8976, subject to public disclosure
  The IRS has opined that Form 8976 cannot be made available under the 
Freedom of Information Act or other disclosure laws. This opinion 
creates a discrepancy between those organizations for which the IRS 
must make publicly available information--all Section

501(c)(3) organizations and 501(c)(4) organizations that applied for 
that status--and self-declared 501(c)(4) organizations. This 
discrepancy appears to have been inadvertently created by the PATH Act.
  This bill would fix this discrepancy by requiring the IRS to publicly 
disclose any filed Form 8976 upon request, thus allowing the public to 
know which organizations operate under 501(c)(4), as they do with 
organizations that operate under 501(c)(3). In the aftermath of the 
Supreme Courts Citizens United decision, which allows unlimited 
expenditures in political campaigns by these ``social welfare 
organizations, greater transparency is needed.
  I urge my colleagues to support this bill.
had I been present for Roll 
Call No. 349, Self Amendment No. 3, I would have voted Nay.
  Had I been present for Roll Call No. 350, Jackon Amendment No. 4, I 
would have voted Yay.
RECOGNIZING KEN HAYWARDS INDUCTION TO THE MICHIGAN BASEBALL HALL OF 
                                  FAME
I rise today to recognize Ken Hayward, a 
resident of Ann Arbor, Michigan, on the occasion of his induction into 
the Michigan Baseball Hall of Fame. His contributions to Wolverine 
athletics and the state of Michigan are worthy of commendation.
  Ken was born in 1963 to Bud and Pat Hayward as their only child. A 
native of Waterford, Michigan, Kens talent and passion on the baseball 
diamond was evident from an early age. After a tremendous high school 
career, he received a scholarship to play baseball at the University of 
Michigan.
  A four-time letterman, Ken was also a four-time First Team All-Big 
Ten honoree. His time on the team saw the Wolverines win two Big Ten 
Conference Titles, two NCAA Regional Championships, and multiple trips 
to the College World Series. He still holds Michigan career records for 
batting average, RBIs, and games played. Going the extra mile for his 
team, Ken also pitched for his last two seasons, going 12-2 and 
recording 7 saves. In 1985, as a senior and team captain, Ken batted 
432 with 13 home runs and 64 RBIs in 65 games. His achievements earned 
him a Big Ten Medal of Honor and the 1985 Michigan Athlete of the Year 
award.
  Shortly after he graduated from the University of Michigan, Ken 
embarked on a long and successful career in the hospitality industry. 
Starting in 1985 as a sales representative, by 2010 he was the 
Executive VP and Managing Director of Grand Hotel on Mackinac Island, 
consistently ranked as one of the worlds top hotels. Ken was appointed 
to the Michigan Travel Commission by Gov. Jennifer Granholm in 2005 and 
then reappointed in 2008. Ken served as the commissions chairman from 
2008 to 2010. During his tenure as chairman, Travel Michigan secured 
funding to develop the Pure Michigan advertising campaign, which 
continues today as a national brand and marketing effort for Michigan 
travel and tourism. Since 2021, Ken has been a VP at Blue Cross Blue 
Shield of Michigan, directing their social mission and community 
affairs.
, I ask my colleagues to join me today in celebrating Ken 
Hayward and all the accomplishments he achieved on behalf of our 
Wolverines and the entire State of Michigan. A consummate professional, 
we couldnt have asked for a better representative of our great state. 
I thank Ken and congratulate him on this tremendous achievement.
I rise today in recognition of Freedoms 
125th Old Home Week Parade. Freedom has become an example of how small 
towns and other communities in New Hampshire can grow strongest through 
shared traditions that bring together a communitys past and present.
  In 1831, after the community of North Effingham voted to secede from 
the town of Effingham, they chose the name ``Freedom

for their new town--a tribute to their residents achieving their goal 
of self-determination. Freedoms location on the north end of Ossipee 
Lake has allowed the town to be a gateway between New Hampshires Lakes 
Region and the White Mountains.
  Old Home Week is a New Hampshire tradition that allows us to 
celebrate the places we call home. Created by New Hampshire governor 
Frank W. Rollins in 1899, Old Home Week was inspired as a way to 
encourage New Hampshire natives to return to their hometown after many 
younger New Hampshirites had moved west in search of economic 
opportunities. In the 21st century, globalization and technological 
advances have reduced social distance throughout the world, but the 
importance of strong, close-knit communities has remained the same. By 
proudly continuing the tradition of Old Home Week, Freedom envisions a 
community where current and former residents alike can be proud of 
their hometown.
  Thank you to the town of Freedom for inviting me to experience their 
community as a part of the Old Home Week Parade. I admire all of the 
volunteers who made this experience possible for the 125th straight 
year. I hope everyone enjoys themselves in celebrating this wonderful 
town. To understand the importance of small towns building a proud 
community for their current and former residents, we all need to hear 
Freedom ring.
today it is my great honor to rise in 
recognition of the countless invaluable contributions of the Naval Air 
Development Center (NADC) in Warminster, Pennsylvania, to the aerospace 
heritage of my community and our entire country.
  For six decades, the NADC has been the cornerstone of United States 
Naval aviation research. Before the era of Silicon Valley and Research 
Triangle Park, NADC was the premier aviation research center and cradle 
of aerospace innovation.
  Originally acquired from the Brewster Aircraft Corporation by the 
United States Government during World War II, the NADC transitioned to 
United States Navy management in 1947 and quickly became synonymous 
with innovation, pioneering advancements in pilotless aircraft, modern 
aircraft design, propulsion systems, electronics, surveillance 
technologies, acoustics processing, communications, navigation 
(including Global Positioning System (GPS)), and weaponry. Its mission 
was clear: to be a global leader in naval aviation research and 
development, and it accomplished this mission successfully.
  The NADC housed over thirty laboratories, each focusing on various 
critical aspects of naval aviation. These hubs of innovation drew 
visionary engineers, scientists, technicians, and support staff from 
across the nation to take part in this groundbreaking research that 
pushed the boundaries of aerospace technology. Their collective efforts 
yielded numerous breakthroughs crucial to securing our national defense 
and advancing global aerospace capabilities.
  Among their countless achievements, one of the most significant was 
the establishment of the Aviation Medical Acceleration Laboratory 
(AMAL). Central to this laboratory was the worlds most powerful human 
centrifuge. Famously known as the ``Johnsville Centrifuge, this 
facility played a critical role in advancing the understanding of high-
performance jet aircrafts effects on pilots, significantly 
contributing to the training and safety protocols of pilots in 
groundbreaking programs like the North American X-15, Mercury, Gemini, 
Apollo Spacecrafts, and Space Shuttle missions.
  In addition, the Anti-Submarine Warfare Laboratory was instrumental 
in developing cutting-edge technologies vital to the Navys Cold War 
efforts. Innovations like the Lockheed P-3 Orion and S-3 Viking 
aircraft, Light Airborne Multi-Purpose System (LAMPS) helicopters, and 
advanced sonobuoys significantly enhanced their capability to detect 
and counter Soviet submarine threats.
  Furthermore, the NADC served as the lead laboratory for several 
iconic aircraft, including the Grumman F-14 Tomcat, McDonnell Douglas 
F/A-18 Hornet tactical fighters, the Presidential Helicopter fleet, and 
the Take Charge and Move Out (TACAMO) communications platforms. Its 
influence extended beyond aircraft to encompass the entire spectrum of 
navigation systems used by Navy aircraft, submarines, and surface 
vessels.
  The NADC crew systems office was also responsible for pioneering 
advancements in aviation life support, life sciences, and crew station 
technologies. From the Navy Common Ejection Seat (NACES) to flight 
helmets and flame-retardant NOMEX flight suits, the innovations and 
initiatives born out of this office underscore the profound impact the 
NADC has had in enhancing pilot safety and mission effectiveness.

  The Naval Air Development Centers legacy has shaped the past and 
future of naval aviation and inspired generations of engineers, 
scientists, and innovators to pursue excellence in aerospace research 
and development.
, I stand before this esteemed chamber proud and humbled 
to celebrate the invaluable contributions of the NADC and commend their 
decades of dedication, expertise, leadership, ingenuity and innovation. 
Because of their commitment to fostering exploration, research, and 
development in aerospace technology, our Nation continues to be a 
leader on the global stage of aviation technology.
I rise today to honor Major Matthew D. 
Willey for his retirement from the United States Air Force after 20 
years of distinguished service.
  Major Willey enlisted in the Air Force after graduating from the 
University of Iowa in 2003 Throughout his career, he consistently 
demonstrated exceptional leadership, dedication, and a strong work 
ethic. In 2009, he commissioned and cross-trained in the Tactical Air 
Control Party Officer career field. He has deployed multiple times in 
support of Operation Resolute Support, Operation Iraqi Freedom, and 
Operation Enduring Freedom. Among his many accomplishments, he notably 
became the first in his career field to receive the Air Force 
Commendation Medal with Valor in August of 2011. This prestigious award 
is reserved for those who display extraordinary heroism in the face of 
extreme danger. While in Afghanistan, Major Willeys detachment was 
ambushed by insurgents, and he was forced to cross open fire to call in 
a danger close strafing run. This display of remarkable bravery and 
selflessness resulted in the elimination of 15 insurgents without a 
single American casualty. His quick thinking and courageous actions 
serve as a profound example for all.
  Major Willey has continued to excel as a leader, not only in combat 
but also in his roles as Flight Commander, Assistant Director of 
Operations, and Director of Operations, accumulating over 14 awards and 
decorations throughout his illustrious 20-year career. But he hasnt 
stopped there, he has spent these last two years of service here in the 
great state Iowa, striving to cultivate and shape the minds of young 
men and women, both as students as well as cadets. Through his role as 
Assistant Professor of Aerospace Studies as well his role as Operations 
Officer at Air Force Reserve Officer Training Corps Detachment 250 at 
Iowa State University, he dedicates himself to the task of producing 
the highest quality and highest caliber of students and officers for 
not only the United States Air and Space Force but for this nation. 
Major Willey not only reflects great credit upon himself, but he 
reflects great credit up the United States Air Force and his country.
, I urge my colleagues to join me in recognizing Major 
Willey for his unwavering dedication to our country. His service before 
self, exceptional military achievements, and steadfast roles as a 
spouse, father, and friend have not only enhanced our national security 
but also stand as a testament to the values of bravery, devotion, and 
compassion. I join Major Willeys family, friends, and colleagues in 
celebrating his retirement and extend to him my heartfelt best wishes 
for the future.
today a Service of Worship 
in Remembrance of and Thanksgiving for Life was held for Maria Locke 
Boineau Macaulay at the historic First Presbyterian Church of Columbia, 
South Carolina. Services were conducted by Reverend Dr. David H. 
Lauten, with organist Thomas Russell, and soloist Emma Hagood.
  I am grateful Maria was the wife of my fellow former State Senator 
Alex Macaulay and my cherished Boineau second cousin.
  I include in the Record the following obituary that was published in 
the service bulletin:

       ``Maria Locke Boineau Macaulay passed away in the morning 
     of July 17, 2024. Born in Columbia on January 11, 1943, Maria 
     was the proud daughter of the late Edward ``Bru Boineau and 
     Helen Gayle Bell Boineau. She attended Columbia High, where 
     at 52 and 95 pounds she earned the nickname ``Moose. A 
     lifelong lover of books and the Gamecocks, she graduated from 
     the University of South Carolina with a bachelors degree in 
     English.
       ``After a brief stint in Charlotte, she returned to her 
     home state and married her first (and only) husband Alex 
     Macaulay of Columbia. In 1973, she moved with her husband and 
     two children--also named Maria and Alex--to Walhalla, South 
     Carolina where she established herself as a vibrant and 
     active presence in the community. As a member of the Walhalla 
     Presbyterian Church, she played in the hand bell choir with a 
     focus and intensity that was truly something to behold. She 
     worked years as an award winning and beloved substitute 
     teacher at Walhalla High School. While the students never 
     wished any ill will on their day to day teachers, they were 
     always excited when they walked in the classroom and saw Mrs. 
     Macaulay sitting behind the desk. In addition to her daily 
     walks around Sertoma Field, she dedicated countless hours to 
     the Oconee Public Library, delivering books throughout the 
     county, serving as chairperson of the Librarys Board of 
     Trustees and as president of the Oconee County Friends of the 
     Library. In 1999, she was appointed by the governor to the 
     South Carolina State Library Board and would go on to chair 
     its Board of Trustees as well.
       ``A devoted and exuberant mother and grandmother, Riri, as 
     her six grandchildren called her, traveled across South 
     Carolina and the mountains of western North Carolina taking 
     them on vacations as well as attending an infinite number of 
     sporting events, dance recitals, graduations, birthday 
     parties, and other special and non-special occasions where 
     she let the children know each and every time how much she 
     loved them and how proud she was of them.
       ``Maria is survived by her husband, Alex Macaulay; her 
     sister, Gayle Boineau Darby; her daughter, Maria Macaulay 
     Sellers; her son, Alex Macaulay; a slew of grandchildren, 
     Maria Locke Sellers, Sarah Calhoun Sellers, Eliza Maxwell 
     Macaulay, Lee Edward Macaulay, Kate Eleanor Macaulay, and 
     Julia Webster Macaulay; and an even bigger bundle of cousins, 
     nieces and nephews.