Title IV of Senate Resolution 4, agreed to by the Senate of February 
4, 1977, calls for establishment of a system for a computerized 
schedule of all meetings and hearings of Senate committees, 
subcommittees, joint committees, and committees of conference. This 
title requires all such committees to notify the Office of the Senate 
Daily Digest--designated by the Rules Committee--of the time, place and 
purpose of the meetings, when scheduled and any cancellations or 
changes in the meetings as they occur.
  As an additional procedure along with the computerization of this 
information, the Office of the Senate Daily Digest will prepare this 
information for printing in the Extensions of Remarks section of the 
Congressional Record on Monday and Wednesday of each week.
  Meetings scheduled for Tuesday, May 21, 2024 may be found in the 
Daily Digest of todays Record.

                                 MAY 22
     Time to be announced
       Committee on Small Business and Entrepreneurship
         Business meeting to consider S. 3772, to amend the Small 
           Business Act to require that plain writing statements 
           regarding the solicitation of subcontractors be 
           included in certain subcontracting plans, S. 3971, to 
           amend the Small Business Act to require reporting on 
           additional information with respect to small business 
           concerns owned and controlled by women, qualified 
           HUBZone small business concerns, and small business 
           concerns owned and controlled by veterans, S. 4341, to 
           require plain language and the inclusion of key words 
           in covered notices that are clear, concise, and 
           accessible to small business concerns, and an original 
           bill entitled, ``The STEP Modernization Act of 2024.
                                                               TBA
     9:45 a.m.
       Committee on Environment and Public Works
         Business meeting to consider S. 4359, to amend the 
           National Dam Safety Program Act to reauthorize that 
           Act, S. 3564, to amend title 40, United States Code, to 
           include Indian Tribes among entities that may receive 
           Federal surplus real property for certain purposes, S. 
           3880, to amend the Federal Assets Sale and Transfer Act 
           of 2016 to make improvements to that Act, S. 4293, to 
           designate the United States courthouse annex located at 
           310 South Main Street in London, Kentucky, as the 
           ``Eugene E. Siler, Jr. United States Courthouse 
           Annex, H.R. 4688, to direct the Administrator of 
           General Services to sell the property known as the 
           Webster School, and an original bill entitled, ``Water 
           Resources Development Act of 2024; to be immediately 
           followed by a hearing to examine Federal programs for 
           the circular economy, focusing on state and local 
           perspectives on efforts to improve reuse and recycling.
                                                            SD-406
     10 a.m.
       Committee on Appropriations
       Subcommittee on Energy and Water Development
         To hold hearings to examine proposed budget estimates and 
           justification for fiscal year 2025 for the Department 
           of Energy, including the National Nuclear Security 
           Administration.
                                                            SD-192
       Committee on Finance
         To hold hearings to examine the Family First Prevention 
           Services Act, focusing on successes, roadblocks, and 
           opportunities for improvement.
                                                            SD-215
       Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
         To hold hearings to examine restoring Congressional 
           oversight over emergency powers, focusing on exploring 
           options to reform the National Emergencies Act.
                                                            SD-342
       Committee on the Judiciary
         To hold hearings to examine pending nominations.
                                                            SD-226
     10:30 a.m.
       Committee on the Budget
         To hold hearings to examine water scarcity in a changing 
           climate.
                                                            SD-608
     11:45 a.m.
       Joint Congressional Committee on Inaugural Ceremonies--2024
         Organizational business meeting to designate the Chair, 
           designate the 2025 Inaugural site, approve the 
           Inaugural budget, and designate official staff 
           representatives.
                                                             S-219
     2:30 p.m.
       Committee on Appropriations
       Subcommittee on Legislative Branch
         To hold hearings to examine proposed budget estimates and 
           justification for fiscal year 2025 for the Sergeant at 
           Arms and Doorkeeper of the Senate and the United States 
           Capitol Police.
                                                            SD-124
       Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs
       Subcommittee on Economic Policy
         To hold hearings to examine protecting consumers 
           pocketbooks, focusing on lowering food prices and 
           combatting corporate price gouging and consolidation.
                                                            SD-538
       Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions
       Subcommittee on Employment and Workplace Safety
         To hold hearings to examine new standards and practices 
           in mining, focusing on health and safety.
                                                            SD-430
       Committee on Indian Affairs
         To hold an oversight hearing to examine public safety and 
           justice resources in Native communities.
                                                            SD-628
       Select Committee on Intelligence
         Closed business meeting to consider pending intelligence 
           matters.
                                                            SH-219
     4:45 p.m.
       Committee on Armed Services
       Subcommittee on Strategic Forces
         To hold hearings to examine the Department of Energys 
           atomic energy defense activities and Department of 
           Defense nuclear weapons programs in review of the 
           Defense Authorization Request for Fiscal Year 2025 and 
           the Future Years Defense Program.
                                                            SR-222

                                 MAY 23
     9:30 a.m.
       Committee on Appropriations
       Subcommittee on Commerce, Justice, Science, and Related 
           Agencies
         To hold hearings to examine proposed budget estimates and 
           justification for fiscal year 2025 for the National 
           Aeronautics and Space Administration and for the 
           National Science Foundation.
                                                            SD-192
       Special Committee on Aging
         To hold hearings to examine the Older Americans Act, 
           focusing on the local impact of the law and the 
           upcoming reauthorization.
                                                            SD-106
     10 a.m.
       Committee on Appropriations
       Subcommittee on Labor, Health and Human Services, and 
           Education, and Related Agencies
         To hold hearings to examine proposed budget estimates and 
           justification for fiscal year 2025 for the National 
           Institutes of Health.
                                                            SD-124
       Committee on Finance
         To hold hearings to examine the front lines of the 
           fentanyl crisis, focusing on supporting communities and 
           combating addiction through prevention and treatment.
                                                            SD-215
       Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions
         Business meeting to consider S. 3679, to reauthorize the 
. 
           3765, to amend the Public Health Service Act to 
           reauthorize the Emergency Medical Services for Children 
           program, S. 4351, to amend the Public Health Service 
           Act to reauthorize certain poison control programs, S. 
           3775, to amend the Public Health Service Act to 
           reauthorize the BOLD Infrastructure for Alzheimers 
           Act, S. 4325, to amend the Public Health Service Act to 
           reauthorize the program relating to lifespan respite 
           care, S. 3757, to reauthorize the congenital heart 
           disease research, surveillance, and awareness program 
           of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, S. 
           4045, to require a study on public health impacts as a 
           consequence of the February 3, 2023, train derailment 
           in East Palestine, Ohio, the nomination of Stephen H. 
           Ravas, of Maryland, to be Inspector General,

           Corporation for National and Community Service, and 
           other pending calendar business.
                                                            SD-430
       Committee on the Judiciary
         Business meeting to consider S. 1306, to reauthorize the 
           COPS ON THE BEAT grant program.
                                                            SD-G50
     10:30 a.m.
       Committee on Appropriations
       Subcommittee on Interior, Environment, and Related Agencies
         To hold hearings to examine proposed budget estimates and 
           justification for fiscal year 2025 for Indian Country.

                                                            SD-138
                                 JUNE 4
     2 p.m.
       Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe
         To hold hearings to examine supporting Georgias 
           sovereignty and democracy.

                                                               TBA
                                JUNE 12
     10 a.m.
       Committee on Environment and Public Works
         To hold hearings to examine the Presidents proposed 
           budget request for fiscal year 2025 for the Fish and 
           Wildlife Service.
                                                            SD-406