I rise today in support of the 
brave and selfless members of our nations Coast Guard. I also rise to 
urge my colleagues to join me in working to develop Americas maritime 
and shipbuilding workforce to meet the growing demand of the offshore 
wind industry.
  I am concerned that the Coast Guard Reauthorization Act, which is a 
critical piece of legislation, includes language that would be 
detrimental to the budding domestic offshore wind industry. If enacted 
without changes, this bill would significantly slow our transition to 
clean, renewable, and domestic energy. We have seen this worrisome 
provision before. Numerous stakeholders, then and now, have expressed 
concern that crewing requirements on globally rare vessels that are 
already in high demand would make it all but impossible for offshore 
wind projects to move forward in the near term.
  While I certainly share the goal of expanding opportunities for 
American mariners in offshore wind farm construction, this jeopardizes 
jobs in offshore wind manufacturing as well as jobs that will last 
decades in offshore wind turbine operations and maintenance. While I 
plan to vote for this legislation due to the important work of our 
nations Coast Guard, I urge my colleagues to work together and remove 
this shortsighted provision.
  Last spring, in the interest of finding a path to empower American 
workers without threatening progress in the near term, I introduced the 
Offshore Wind American Manufacturing Act. This Act requires the U.S. 
Government Accountability Office (GAO) to conduct a study to inform 
public and private investment in shipbuilding and workforce training to 
support the Biden Administrations goal of deploying 30 gigawatts of 
offshore wind energy by 2030. The study would also identify ways that 
current policies could be strengthened to support

American workers, including new opportunities for American mariners 
interested in installing offshore wind on the outer continental shelf.
  This study is a pragmatic approach that balances our responsibility 
to reduce emissions and support American workers and mariners. Thanks 
to momentum generated by the passage of the Inflation Reduction Act, 
offshore wind has the potential to catalyze major investments in 
American manufacturing and shipbuilding. By studying opportunities to 
maximize the role of American mariners and shipbuilders in meeting 
these goals, we ensure that we do not allow the perfect to become the 
enemy of the good.
I rise today to thank Lieutenant Colonel 
Kelsey Rousey for her dedicated service to the people of American Samoa 
and all the Pacific Islands as Deputy to the House Liaison Division in 
the U.S. Armys Office of the Chief, Legislative Liaison.
  In American Samoa, our men and women of the Armed Forces are very 
important to us The people of our islands take great pride in being 
patriotic Americans and our people are known for a high rate of service 
in our military In particular, our U S Army recruiting center ranks 
number one in the nation in enlistment rate.
  To that end I would like to recognize all the work LTC Rousey has 
done to serve our country throughout her career, so far. She received 
her commission through the ROTC program at John Carroll University, as 
Transportation Officer.
  She has an extensive list of military awards and decorations 
including the Bronze Star Medal, the Meritorious Service Medal with 
four oak leaf clusters, the Army Commendation Medal with three oak leaf 
clusters, and the Meritorious Volunteer Medal. She was instrumental in 
sharing the Army message throughout the House of Representatives and 
Congress.
  In congratulating this outstanding officer today, we also express our 
deep appreciation to all who serve, including the many in uniform from 
American Samoa serving with distinction all over the world.
  In thank Kelsey for her outstanding leadership and her commitment to 
our Soldiers, American Samoa, and our great Nation. Best wishes to her 
and her family as she departs for Pennsylvania and the U.S. Army War 
College I thank her for her service and her tone dedicated to our 
beautiful island.
  God bless you on your journey (Faamanumia le Atua i ou ala. Soifua).
I rise today to honor the life of Marine 
veteran Conrad C. Janowski, who passed away on May 12, 2024.
  A long-time resident of Fort Wayne, Indiana, Conrad was a respected 
member of the community, an accomplished architect, and beloved 
husband, father, and friend.
  Conrad attended the University of Notre Dame, where he graduated with 
a Bachelor of Architecture degree. After he moved his family to Fort 
Wayne, he served on the Board of Directors for the Indiana Society of 
Architects and was President of the Northern Chapter early in his 
career. One of Conrads greatest sources of pride throughout his life 
was his service in the United States Marine Corps from 1956 to 1958.
  We honor Conrad for his service to his country and for the civic 
leadership he showed across the entirety of his life. May he rest in 
peace.
I rise today to honor University of North 
Texas (UNT) President Neal J. Smatresk, PhD who has dedicated his 
career to advancing education and transforming institutions. President 
Smatresks tenure at UNT has been marked by innovation, growth, and a 
relentless commitment to excellence.
  President Smatresks journey in academia has been distinguished by 
his unwavering dedication to fostering academic success and research 
excellence. Before assuming his role at UNT, President Smatresk held 
pivotal leadership positions at the University of Nevada, Las Vegas 
(UNLV), the University of Hawaii at Manoa, and the University of Texas 
at Arlington.
  Prior to his roles in Administration, Dr. Smatresk was a 
distinguished biologist and researcher. His scholarly pursuits focused 
on advancing our understanding of respiratory neurobiology, garnering 
substantial grant support, and resulting in numerous publications. His 
dedication to STEM education and outreach left an indelible mark on 
countless aspiring scientists and scholars.
  President Smatresks leadership at UNT has been nothing short of 
transformative and has propelled UNT to unprecedented heights, 
fostering a culture of achievement and inclusivity. Under his guidance, 
UNT has achieved a remarkable five-year record of continued enrollment 
growth, now serving almost 47,000 students; reflecting President 
Smatresks dedication to expanding access to higher education and 
empowering students to pursue their academic aspirations. Additionally, 
President Smatresk led UNT to becoming a Carnegie-ranked Tier One 
institution that has emerged as a top 10 U.S. public university on the 
rise. While his strategic vision and commitment to student success has 
propelled UNT to new heights, earning recognition as both a Minority-
Serving and Hispanic-Serving Institution and securing its place as one 
of only 22 Carnegie-ranked Tier One research universities designated as 
Hispanic-Serving Institutions.
  President Smatresks impact extends far beyond the realm of academia. 
Through strategic partnerships with industry leaders and innovative 
program offerings, such as UNTs groundbreaking M.B.A. program in sport 
entertainment management in collaboration with the Dallas Cowboys, 
President Smatresk has positioned UNT as a pioneer in higher education. 
His innovative approach to fostering partnerships between academia and 
industry has positioned UNT as a leader in addressing the evolving 
needs of the workforce. Through strategic collaborations with companies 
such as American Airlines, Liberty Mutual, Google, and JP Morgan Chase, 
President Smatresk has created new avenues for experiential learning 
and professional development, ensuring that UNT graduates are well-
equipped to thrive in todays competitive job market.
  Moreover, his commitment to expanding UNTs presence in Collin County 
through the establishment of the UNT at Frisco branch campus 
underscores his dedication to expanding UNTs reach across the growing 
DFW region and fostering economic development through education. 
President Smatresk has also overseen a commitment to athletic 
investments and facility expansions that has transformed UNTs athletic 
program into a powerhouse of excellence and helped to secure UNTs 
membership into Conference USA. The Mean Green student-athletes and 
teams, under his leadership, have flourished, exemplifying the 
universitys spirit of determination and achievement.
  President Neal J. Smatresks visionary leadership, unwavering 
dedication, and profound impact on higher education will leave an 
enduring legacy at the University of North Texas and beyond. On behalf 
of the constituents of the 26th Congressional District of Texas, I 
extend my heartfelt gratitude to President Smatresk for his exemplary 
service and wish him a fulfilling and rewarding retirement.
today, I introduce the District of Columbia 
Public Defender Service Technical Correction Act, which would fix a 
drafting error in the Further Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2024. 
Unless fixed, this error will force the D.C. Public Defender Service 
(PDS) to close one day per week beginning in mid-June through the rest 
of the current fiscal year. I very much appreciate that Senator Chris 
Van Hollen will be introducing the bill in the Senate. I also 
appreciate that he filed an amendment on the Senate floor to the FAA 
Reauthorization Act of 2024 to fix this error, but am disappointed that 
the Senate did not take it up.
  PDS is independent of the D.C. government, is exclusively funded by 
the federal government and its employees are deemed federal employees 
for purposes of federal benefits. The Further Consolidated 
Appropriations Act, 2024 provides PDS $53,629,000 in fiscal year 2024, 
the same funding level PDS received in fiscal year 2023. However, the 
Further Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2024 requires PDS to spend $3 
million of its appropriation on office relocation expenses, even though 
PDS had already relocated offices before the bill was enacted. PDS 
needs the authority to spend that $3 million on salaries, or it will be 
forced to close one day per week. My bill would give PDS the authority 
to spend that $3 million on salaries.
  The drafting error will not only harm PDS employees, who will not be 
paid when PDS is closed, it will also harm the local criminal justice 
system in D.C. On the days that PDS is closed, PDS attorneys will not 
appear in any matter before the D.C. Superior Court, the D.C. Court of 
Appeals, the U.S. Parole Commission or other administrative or 
adjudicative body. The local D.C. court system is already facing a 
backlog of cases because of a shortage of judges, who are appointed by 
the president, subject to Senate confirmation. The PDS furloughs will 
only exacerbate this problem. This is simply an unacceptable result, 
especially when it will have been caused by what everyone acknowledges 
is a drafting error, and not a deliberate cut to PDSs funding.
  I urge my colleagues to support this bill.
I rise to speak in opposition to H.R. 
354, the LEOSA Reform Act.

  On May 21, 2024, page E539, in the first column, the following 
appeared: LEOSA REFORM ACT ----- HON. SHEILA JACKSON LEE OF TEXAS 
IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES Tuesday, May 21, 2024 Ms. JACKSON 
LEE. Mr. Speaker, I rise to
  
  The online version has been corrected to read: LEOSA REFORM ACT 
----- SPEECH OF HON. SHEILA JACKSON LEE OF TEXAS IN THE HOUSE OF 
REPRESENTATIVES Thursday, May 16, 2024 Ms. JACKSON LEE. Mr. 
Speaker, I rise to

  In 2004, Congress passed the Law Enforcement Officer Safety Act 
(LEOSA), permitting qualified active and retired law enforcement 
officers to carry concealed firearms and ammunition in certain places.
  Every state allows the concealed carry of firearms subject to certain 
conditions, but the original LEOSA overrode whatever permit, training, 
or other requirements might be in place--with important, commonsense 
exceptions for National Parks, playgrounds, government buildings, 
private property, and other sensitive areas.
  I should note that I was a member of the House Judiciary Committee 
when it passed the original LEOSA in 2004.
  At that time, the Committee was under Republican control, but it 
still followed regular order.
  We held a hearing on the bill in which we heard from several law 
enforcement organizations.
  Some expressed support for the bill as a way for officers to protect 
themselves and be able to respond to a dangerous situation whether they 
were in their home jurisdiction or not, on-duty or off-duty, active or 
retired.
  Other law enforcement organizations opposed the legislation, 
expressing concerns about creating confusion in the field that might 
even endanger law enforcement.
  While some of my colleagues on both sides of the aisle expressed 
concerns about the original LEOSA, I was satisfied that it struck an 
appropriate balance.
  I supported the original LEOSA because it included limits for special 
places.
  It had exceptions so that states would still have some control over 
whether retired and off-duty law enforcement officers would be allowed 
to carry concealed weapons in places like parks, playgrounds, Gun-Free 
School Zones, and state and local government buildings.
  States should be allowed to regulate these places consistent with the 
needs of the state.
  Allowing them to do so protects local law enforcement by making sure 
they know what to expect when responding to a scene.
  The original LEOSA also respected the rights of private property 
owners to prohibit concealed weapons on their property if they chose to 
do so.
  And with respect to retired officers, it ensured that they would 
continue to receive annual firearms training so that they would know 
how to safely use the concealed firearm that they were carrying.
  The legislation before us today, however, upsets the balance struck 
by the original LEOSA and it is being advanced without a hearing that 
would help us fully evaluate its strengths and weaknesses.
  While I supported the original LEOSA, I oppose the legislation before 
us today because it would allow more concealed weapons in parks, 
playgrounds, Gun-Free School Zones, local government buildings, and on 
private property even when it is contrary to the judgment of state 
leaders and private property owners.
  Todays bill also weakens the training standards for retired officers 
as set forth in the original LEOSA, which is especially concerning.
  Marksmanship is a perishable skill that must be renewed through 
practice and training.
  By relaxing the training standards, todays bill would allow retired 
officers to carry concealed firearms despite it being as many as three 
years since they last received training--and it could be that they 
retired from law enforcement more years before that.
  I respect the rights of lawful and responsible gun owners, including 
the rights of retired and off-duty law enforcement.
  We should allow these individuals to carry concealed weapons into 
many places, provided they meet certain qualifications including 
regular training.
  But this bill would allow concealed weapons to be carried by those 
who have not received recent training.
  And it would allow concealed firearms in spaces where a state may 
have a valid public safety interest in prohibiting them.
  For these reasons, I must oppose this legislation and I urge my 
colleagues to vote no on this bill.
-BALART. Mr. Speaker, I was unable to vote on May 14th and 
May 15th as I had an immovable commitment. Had I been present, I would 
have voted: YEA on Roll Call No. 196; YEA on Roll Call No. 197; YEA on 
Roll Call No. 200; YEA on Roll Call No. 204; YEA on Roll Call No. 203; 
YEA on Roll Call No. 202; YEA on Roll Call No. 201; YEA on Roll Call 
No. 205; YEA on Roll Call No. 206; YEA on Roll Call No. 207; YEA on 
Roll Call No. 208; YEA on Roll Call No. 209; YEA on Roll Call No. 210; 
YEA on Roll Call No. 211; and YEA on Roll Call No. 212.
I rise today to honor Dr. Dev 
A. GnanaDev for his decades of service as a healthcare provider in the 
Inland Empire and to celebrate the naming of the Dr. Dev A. GnanaDev 
Trauma Center at the Arrowhead Regional Medical Center.
  Dr. GnanaDev started his over 40-year career serving the Inland 
Empire as a member of the medical staff at the San Bernardino County 
Medical Center, which eventually was renamed the Arrowhead Regional 
Medical Center. At Arrowhead Regional, he played a key role in the 
development of the trauma center as the Founding Director of Trauma 
Services until being appointed as the Medical Director of the Arrowhead 
Regional Medical Center in June 2000. Under his 12-year leadership, 
Arrowhead Regional Medical Center took critical steps to expand its 
patient services and physician training programs. Today, Dr. GnanaDev 
serves as the Associate Director of Medicine and the Chairman of the 
Department of Surgery at Arrowhead Regional Medical Center, a position 
he has held since 1989.
  Dr GnanaDev has dedicated a lifetime to improving access to and the 
quality of health care in the Inland Empire. As the Founding President 
of the California University of Science and Medicine and as a Clinical 
Professor of Surgery at Western University of Health Sciences and the 
California University of Science and Medicine, Dr. GnanaDev has taken 
tremendous steps in addressing the physician shortage impacting our 
communities.
  This week, our community is coming together to celebrate Dr. 
GnanaDevs commitment to a healthy Inland Empire. On Thursday, May 
23rd, Arrowhead Regional Medical Center will officially be named the 
. This honor will ensure that Dr. 
GnanaDevs profound impact on our communitys health and wellbeing will 
be remembered for generations to come.
  For his outstanding accomplishments, it is my honor to recognize Dev 
A. GnanaDev, M.D., M.B.A, F.A.C.S. His years of service and commitment 
to the people of the Inland Empire are worthy of the highest 
commendation.
I rise today to extend my 
warmest congratulations to Fredon Township on its 120th anniversary. I 
am truly grateful to be celebrating this monumental milestone with 
them. Over the past 120 years, Fredon Township has flourished into a 
lively town with vibrant natural scenery and rich history. As the 
youngest township in Sussex County, Fredon Township was formed from 
parts of Andover, Green, Hampton, and Stillwater Townships and is home 
to approximately 3,450 residents and 1,203 residential dwellings. Once 
a dusty, rutted, narrow dirt road on Route 94, traveling through a busy 
little village in the 1800s, can now be found as the core of the 
township. I am proud to have such a remarkable town within the 7th 
District, and I look forward to watching it continue to thrive in the 
coming decades. I wish Fredon Township a wonderful 120th anniversary. 
May its next 120 years be filled with as much success as this one.
I rise today to join Hackensack Meridian 
Health in commemorating the 50th anniversary of Behavioral Health 
Services at Jersey Shore University Medical Center and Riverview 
Medical Center. The hospitals vision and commitment to supporting the 
well-being of Monmouth and Ocean Countys communities is truly 
deserving of this bodys recognition.
  Since 1974, Jersey Shore University Medical Center and Riverview 
Medical Center

have offered a range of inpatient and outpatient behavioral health 
services, including psychiatry, crisis and emergency services, 
hospitalization, consultation, and education. Over the years, services 
have expanded to include addiction and childrens programs.
  Additionally, in 1979, Jersey Shore Medical Center began mobile 
services in Asbury Park under a grant from the State of New Jersey. To 
better meet the needs of its clients, the program, coined Park Place, 
moved to a facility, first operating out of the local United Methodist 
Church, then to a home on Sewall Avenue, and later to a property on 
Bond Street. The Park Place program continued to expand and adapt, 
integrating services and other programs until 2019 when it was merged 
with the Riverview Medical Center Behavioral Health Acute Partial 
Program.
  For 50 years, Jersey Shore University Medical Center and Riverview 
Medical Center have been providing services, education, outreach, and 
support to individuals with mental health and substance abuse disorders 
Their efforts to improve the quality and availability of support 
services are important for the health and well-being of individuals and 
their families.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in recognizing Jersey 
Shore University Medical Center and Riverview Medical Center for 50 
years of providing comprehensive behavioral health services and 
thanking its staff and members for their extraordinary service to the 
community.
I rise today to honor the men and women of 
the United States Border Patrol for the 100 years of incredible service 
they have provided to our country, ensuring security and sovereignty at 
our borders. Since its founding on May 1, 1924--the first anniversary 
of the signing of the 1923 Border Convention between the United States 
and Mexico, the United States Border Patrol has been dedicated to 
defending the borders of our great Nation.
  The members of the United States Border Patrol work day and night, 
hour upon hour, in harsh conditions and dangerous circumstances to 
ensure that terrorists, weapons, drugs and contraband do not make their 
way into the United States.
  Today, I wish to shine a spotlight on one of the integral sectors 
within the United States Customs and Border Patrol--the Buffalo Sector. 
Situated along the Northern border, the Buffalo Sector plays a pivotal 
role in securing our nations perimeter Sprawling across vast 
landscapes, from the Great Lakes to the Appalachian Mountains, its 
agents stand as

guardians of the gateway between the United States and Canada.
  In the Buffalo Sector, CBP agents face unique challenges, navigating 
diverse terrain and weather conditions with unwavering determination. 
From bustling urban centers to remote wilderness, they remain steadfast 
in their mission to uphold the rule of law and protect our communities 
Their tireless efforts have thwarted illicit activities, intercepted 
smugglers, and safeguarded our borders from potential threats.
  But beyond their operational duties, the agents of the Buffalo Sector 
embody the swift of service and sacrifice They forge bonds with the 
communities they serve, building trust and collaboration to ensure the 
safety of all, Their commitment to excellence and their willingness to 
go above and beyond the call of duty exemplifies the finest traditions 
of the United States Customs and Border Patrol.
  The United States Border Patrol embodies the highest standard of 
courage and dedication to duty, exemplified by serving in the most 
hazardous environment with professionalism, unmatched performance, and 
unwavering ethics.
  Today, I am joined by my Congressional colleagues to hereby recognize 
and applaud the United States Border Patrol for its outstanding service 
and commend it for its contributions to the safety and protection of 
the United States.
  I thank all agents of the United States Border Patrol, past and 
present, who bravely dedicated their efforts to guarding the borders of 
the United States and upholding the rule of law for the past 100 years.
I rise today to recognize Victoria 
Dominguez Salazar for earning the Arvada Wheat Ridge Service 
Ambassadors for Youth Award.
  Victoria has overcome many challenges along her journey to success, 
demonstrating perseverance at every step. Students who strive to make 
the most of their education, like Victoria, develop crucial skills and 
a work ethic that will guide them for the rest of their lives. This 
award is a testament to Victorias hard work, determination, and 
perseverance at Jefferson Jr./Sr. High School and is clearly just the 
beginning of a bright and promising future.
  It is my honor to congratulate Victoria Dominguez Salazar on 
achieving the Arvada Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth Award.
South Carolina is 
recognizing the extraordinary achievements of Gayle Averyt, who is a 
Southern Gentleman who has been a top business and political leader. My 
personal appreciation is for his courage as one of the states earliest 
Republicans, building the modern Party from non-existence to now super 
majorities with all statewide elected officials Republicans.

       Gayle Owen Averyt of Columbia, South Carolina, was born on 
     October 13, 1933, in Montgomery, Alabama, and he died 
     peacefully at his home in Columbia, South Carolina on May 13, 
     2024. He was the second of three children of Edwin Franklin 
     and Asenath Murfee Averyt. Gayles family moved into their 
     first home in Columbia when he was five weeks old.
       Gayle graduated from Dreher High School in 1951. He went on 
     to graduate Cum Laude from Davidson College in 1955 and was 
     inducted into the Phi Beta Kappa Society. He then earned an 
     MBA from Harvard Business School in 1958.
       Gayles father, Edwin, co-founded Colonial Life &amp; Accident 
     Insurance Company in 1937. Gayle joined Colonial Life after 
     Harvard, moving through the management ranks. In 1970, he 
     became the Chairman of the Board and CEO after his father 
     retired. He held those positions until 1993 when Colonial 
     Life merged with UNUM Corporation. Gayle became Chairman 
     Emeritus of Colonial Life and served on UNUMs board from 
     1993 until 1999.
       Gayle and his wife of 61 years, Margaret ``Peg Finlay met 
     on a blind date. This was their first time meeting despite 
     both growing up in Columbia. Safe to say their date was a 
     success and they were married on June 15, 1963, at Kanuga 
     Episcopal Conference Center in Hendersonville, North 
     Carolina.
       Gayle was generous with his time, talents and resources. 
     Being of service gave him priceless memories and enhanced his 
     worldview and purpose. He was on many boards and committees, 
     including the Central Carolina Community Foundation, the 
     South Carolina State Fair Association, the South Carolina 
     Orchestra Association, the South Carolina Ports Authority and 
     the Cultural Council of Richland and Lexington Counties. He 
     was an active member of Trinity Cathedral and served on the 
     Finance Committee and in various other capacities. As a board 
     member, he spent countless hours helping Heathwood Hall 
     Episcopal School and Kanuga Conference Center, two places 
     that were very special to him. Even after he retired, Gayle 
     remained involved in numerous business, civic, political, 
     educational and cultural organizations.
       Some of the awards Gayle received were the Distinguished 
     Alumni Award from Davidson College, Humanitarian of the Year 
     from The United Way of the Midlands, Business Man of the Year 
     from the South Carolina Chamber of Commerce, Honorary Doctor 
     of Public Service from the University of South Carolina, and 
     the Order of the Palmetto from Governor Carroll Campbell. He 
     was inducted into the South Carolina Business Hall of Fame by 
     Junior Achievement.
       Gayle led with humility and in the spirit of collaboration. 
     He was quick to acknowledge that he would not have achieved 
     his accomplishments without the support of Peg, his 
     administrative assistants, the many people who were serving 
     alongside him, and his colleagues and employees at Colonial 
     Life. He said that Colonial Life gave more to him than he 
     ever gave to the company.
       Gayle exercised regularly and was a forerunner in promoting 
     healthy living. He established a wellness center at Colonial 
     Life in the 1980s, offering exercise classes in which he 
     often participated. He and Peg played mixed doubles in tennis 
     and began jogging in the 1970s when it was a new fad. He took 
     up golf in high school and shot a hole in one when he was 83. 
     Gayle loved to dance at any occasion where music was playing. 
     He hung upside down in gravity boots and practiced yoga. He 
     was interviewed in an article about longevity in Smart Money 
     magazine, accompanied by a photo of him standing on his head.
       Gayle was a kind and caring husband, father and 
     grandfather. He will be remembered for his integrity, 
     compassionate heart and the many contributions he made 
     towards helping others.
       Gayle is survived by his wife, Margaret Finlay Averyt; his 
     daughters, Caroline Averyt Lord and Margaret McQueen Averyt; 
     his sisters, Ella Averyt DuBose and Dorothy Averyt Poston; 
     his grandchildren, William Leighton Lord IV, Owen Elliott 
     Lord and Isabelle Finlay Lord; and his six nephews and 
     nieces. He was predeceased by his parents and his youngest 
     daughter, Elinor Finlay Averyt. A nephew is State 
     Representative Kirkman Finlay.
       The memorial service for Gayle will be held on May 23, 2024 
     at 11:00 AM at Trinity Episcopal Cathedral, 1100 Sumter 
     Street, Columbia, SC 29201. A reception will follow the 
     service in Satterlee Hall. Dunbar Funeral Home, Devine Street 
     Chapel, is assisting the family.
       In lieu of flowers, you may consider making a donation to 
     choice.
       Memories of Gayle may be shared at &lt;a href=http://www.dunbarfunerals.com.

&gt;www.dunbarfunerals.com.
I rise to speak in opposition to H. 
Res. 1213, ``A resolution regarding violence against law enforcement 
officers.
  Sadly, H. Res. 1213 is another hypocritical, partisan attack cloaked 
behind a message honoring local law enforcement during National Police 
Week.

  The resolution is full of misinformation, baseless and dangerous 
claims, and political rhetoric that overwhelms its intended purpose and 
has no place in what should be an opportunity to bring Congress 
together in solemn reflection.
  My Republican colleagues have consistently tried to blame the rise in 
violent crime on Democrats and locally-elected District Attorneys and 
with this resolution have attempted once again to label Democrats as 
the party of ``defund the police.
  The resolution asserts without evidence that calls to defund the 
police are tied to an increase in violence against law enforcement 
officers and further implies that locally adopted progressive criminal 
justice reform policies have contributed to the ``negative 
environment in which law enforcement officers work.
  The Resolution fails to acknowledge that the number of officers 
killed in the line of duty decreased substantially each year from 586 
in 2021 to 137 in 2023.
  The resolution advances baseless political attacks against policies 
aimed at addressing decades of mass incarceration and 
overcriminalization, attempting to link policies such as decreased 
criminal penalties and no-cash bail systems with an increase in 
aggression and violence toward law enforcement.
  The Resolution claims that House members are responsible for 
exemplifying a respect for the rule of law and for law enforcement but 
overlooks hypocritical anti-police Republican actions:
  The failure of Republicans to unanimously vote to award the 
Congressional Gold Medal to all police officers who responded to the 
violent January 6th attack on the Capitol and efforts like H. Con. Res. 
106 to marginalize federal law enforcement officers.
  Republican efforts to defund law enforcement, whether by opposing 
grant funding that supports state and local agencies, or by calling to 
abolish federal agencies such as the Federal Bureau of Investigations 
(FBI), the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) and the Bureau of 
Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives (ATF).
   For these reasons I must oppose this fatally flawed resolution--and 
yet another missed opportunity to support and honor law enforcement 
personnel across the country and those who lost their lives in the line 
of duty, without engaging in partisanship on this solemn occasion.