I rise to celebrate and wish a very happy and 
special birthday to Inez Beiswanger, who will turn a whopping 105 years 
old on December 9, 2024.
  Born in Nappanee in 1919, Inez is a resident of Milford, Indiana and 
one of the many

Hoosiers I have the privilege of representing in Congress. Earlier this 
month, some friends, family, and other members of the Milford community 
came together to throw a surprise celebration for Inez, which was a 
fitting testament to such a special, memorable, and impressive 
milestone.
  As she reflects on more than a century of life well lived, Inez is 
full of gratitude to God for the many blessings he has bestowed on her. 
Especially around this time of year, embracing the disposition of 
gratitude that Inez embodies is something that our Nation could use a 
lot more of.
  Inez also credits her long life in part to trying to always be an 
optimist about everything, as well as being content and happy with what 
you have. This mindset has clearly worked, and it is a refreshening 
antidote to the culture of despair and restlessness that we all too 
often witness.
  As she celebrates more than a century of life lived to the fullest, I 
join her family, including her three children, seven grandchildren and 
numerous great-grandchildren, and many other Hoosiers in wishing Inez 
Beiswanger a very happy 105th birthday.
I rise today to honor and congratulate Louis 
English for being named Career Firefighter of the Year for 2024. Louis 
began his career in 1985 as a Firefighter 1 and received Firefighter 2 
certification in 1999. In 2013, he was appointed as Captain. He retired 
from active fire service in March of 2016 but chose to remain as a 
volunteer. In June of 2016, he was reinstated as an Active Reserve. 
With 28 years of full-time service and 8 years of service in the Active 
Reserve, Captain Louis English has dedicated his life to helping 
others. I am so proud to have such a selfless individual residing in 
our district. I congratulate Louis English on this outstanding award.
I rise to honor the public service of Dan 
McCorquodale of San Jose, California.
  From 1953 to 1956, McCorquodale was a Sergeant in the U.S. Marine 
Corps. After graduating from college, he served as a public school 
teacher in Chula Vista, California. In 1964, he became the youngest 
person ever elected to the City Council in Chula Vista, where he served 
as Mayor from 1968 to 1969.
  After moving to San Jose, McCorquodale spent a year walking precincts 
in the third district and was elected to three terms representing north 
and east San Jose, a portion of the City of Santa Clara, and the cities 
of Milpitas and Sunnyvale. During his three terms on the Board, he 
distinguished himself in the issues of environmental protection, 
transportation, water reclamation, parks, justice, and health and human 
services. In 1982, McCorquodale was elected State Senator of the 12th 
district.
  Throughout his political career, he was recognized for his effective 
policymaking. In 1986, he was recognized as Legislator of the Year by 
the California Trial Lawyers Association. In 1987, he was awarded 
Humanitarian of the Year by the Humane Society. In 1988, the California 
Planning and Conservation League named him Legislator of the Year and 
in 1991, the National Organization for Women recognized him as their 
Legislator of the Year. In 1991, the California Governors Committee 
for Employment of Disabled Persons named him Elected Official of the 
Year and in 1992, he was named Legislator of the Year by the California 
Park and Recreation Society.
  It has been my great pleasure to work with Dan throughout the years 
and I honor and thank him for his years in public service and wish him 
the best.
I rise today to wish Lloyd B. Plummer a 
very happy 100th birthday, who will be celebrating his milestone on 
December 15, 2024.
  In 1943, Plummer, the recipient of two Purple Hearts, joined the Army 
among many courageous men to serve our country. His heroic efforts will 
never be forgotten.
  For those who may not know Lloyd, he was one of the first brave 
Americans to serve as a paratrooper during World War II, as a member of 
the 509th Infantry Regiment. Throughout the war, the Fighting 509 was 
assigned to numerous operations, many of which are now recognized as 
suicide missions. Lloyd was faced with many battles, where he suffered 
from frostbite, trench foot, burns, and shrapnel. At all times, he was 
ready to put his body on the line to serve the country he loved. He is 
the true definition of a patriot, willing to sacrifice his life for our 
country.
  In 1945, he was discharged from active duty in the Army and returned 
to Idaho. Lloyd and his family have consistently embodied the 
traditional values we cherish in Idaho.
  I thank Lloyd B. Plummer for his unwavering heroic efforts, and I 
wish him a very happy birthday.
I rise today to honor the service of 
Minnesota House Representative Brian Daniels. First elected in 2014 to 
represent then-District 24B, Representative Daniels has served the 
people of Minnesota honorably in the State House for the past ten 
years, most recently representing District 19A.
  Representative Daniels has worked tirelessly on behalf of his 
constituents in Dodge, Goodhue, Rice, Steele, and Waseca counties, 
particularly with his leadership in championing the priorities of the 
blind and deaf communities across Minnesota.
  Throughout his time in office, Representative Daniels introduced 
numerous bills advocating for greater language access statewide; 
including legislation that would increase proficiency standards to 
teach American Sign Language, as well as legislation that would require 
elementary schools to screen for dyslexia.
  Additionally, he authored legislation to place signage on Interstate 
35, directing drivers to Minnesota State Academy for the Deaf and 
Minnesota State Academy of the Blind in Faribault, bringing awareness 
to travelers from across the country about these outstanding 
educational institutions that we are proud to have in southern 
Minnesota.
  Representative Daniels has done an exemplary job representing the 
people of District 19A, and all of us across southern Minnesota have 
been well-served by his time in office. I wish him the warmest 
congratulations on his retirement.
I rise today to honor the service of 
Minnesota House Representative Brian Pfarr. First elected in 2020 to 
represent then-District 20A, Representative Pfarr has served the people 
of southern Minnesota in the State House for the past four years, most 
recently as the representative for District 22B.
  Prior to his service in the State Legislature, Representative Pfarr 
honorably served our state as a colonel in the Minnesota Army National 
Guard. Since his retirement in 2021, he has brought the same tireless 
work ethic to representing the people of Blue Earth, Le Sueur, Rice, 
and Scott counties.
  The priorities of his constituents have always been at the forefront 
of Representative Pfarrs service in the State House, particularly 
through his continued leadership in the many House committees on which 
he has served throughout the years, including Ways and Means and 
Commerce Finance and Policy.
  Representative Pfarr has done an exemplary job representing the 
people of District 22B, and all of us across southern Minnesota have 
been well-served by his time in office. I am grateful for his many 
years of dedicated public service, and I wish him the warmest 
congratulations on his retirement.
I rise today to honor the service of 
Minnesota House Representative Pat Garofalo. First elected in 2004, 
Representative Garofalo has honorably served in the Minnesota 
Legislature for the past twenty years.
  During his time in office, Representative Garofalo exhibited a 
profound willingness to serve his fellow southern Minnesotans, not only 
as their voice in the House Chamber, but also by his leadership on 
numerous House committees throughout the years. In 2008, Representative 
Garofalo was elected to the position of assistant majority whip for the 
legislative session, and later became chairman of the Education Finance 
Committee, as well as the Job Growth &amp; Energy Affordability Committee.
  Representative Garofalo has done an exemplary job representing his 
constituents in Dakota, Goodhue, and Rice counties for the past two 
decades, and I consider it a true honor to have previously served 
alongside him in the Minnesota State Legislature.
  I am grateful for Representative Garofalos years of dedicated public 
service to southern Minnesota, and I wish him the warmest 
congratulations on his retirement.
I rise in support of H.R. 9580, 
to name a post office in North Carolina after Millie Dunn Veasey. As 
has been noted, she was one of the 855 women from across our country 
who would serve with the historic Women Army Corps 6888, Central Postal 
Battalion (Six Triple Eight) during World War II.
  The Six Triple Eight was the only African American Womens Army Corps 
Battalion unit deployed overseas during WWII. Their efforts to resolve 
a monumental months long backlog of millions of pieces of mail played a 
critical role in maintaining morale for those fighting in the European 
Theater.
  In England and then France, they sorted millions of pieces of mail 
while facing challenging social and war conditions. They not only 
completed their mission but did so in record time.
  Each of these women have their own individual stories but many of 
them are similar to Ms. Veaseys. A desire to serve their country. They 
didnt set out to make history but they did so anyway.
  They served their country honorably and extraordinarily. And came 
home with little fanfare or ceremony, which they did not mind. And 
many, like Ms. Veasey, continued to contribute to their communities 
after they came home.
  I am pleased that we are recognizing these women and that this story 
of service will no longer be lost to history. This postal designation 
will help ensure that Ms. Veaseys service and dedication is remembered 
in her local community.
  A few years ago, I was pleased to spearhead a successful effort in 
Congress, along with Senator Moran, to award the Six Triple Eight with 
the Congressional Gold Medal so that their service cannot only be 
appropriately acknowledged but remembered across our Nation.
100 in 2018 and was buried in 
Raleigh National Cemetery. Sadly, there are less than a handful of 
surviving members of the Six Triple Eight, including Anna Mae Robertson 
of Milwaukee, WI.
  Through efforts like this, we ensure that their story of service and 
sacrifice does not remain lost to history and help to inspire the next 
generation to military service.
I was unavoidably detained and missed a 
vote. Had I been present, I would have voted YEA on Roll Call No. 480 
and YEA on Roll Call No. 481.
HER EXCELLENT WORK ON BEHALF OF MINNESOTAS THIRD CONGRESSIONAL 
                              of minnesota
I rise today to recognize my former 
Communications Director, Samantha Snuggerud Anderson, for her work on 
behalf of every constituent in Minnesotas Third Congressional 
District. In September, Sam was appointed as Communications Director 
for the Minnesota Department of Education under the transformational 
leadership of Governor Tim Walz, and I could not be more proud or 
grateful for her service.
  A Minnesota native, Sam graduated from Minnetonka High School before 
attending Northeastern University in Boston where she earned a 
bachelors degree in political science. Sam has been an essential 
member of my leadership team since the very beginning, and like me, 
came to this work with a background in marketing and a belief in the 
politics of improving peoples lives.
  Spanning impeachments, pandemic, and unrest, the 116th, 117th, and 
118th Congresses were historic by any measure. Just when we thought we 
had cleared the most unprecedented news cycle of our careers, another 
would rise, and I leaned on Sams counsel to navigate each. She is a 
one-of-a-kind professional whose sound judgement, smart instincts, 
reliable execution, and strategic thinking have been critically 
important to the success of this team.
  We could always count on Sams calm confidence and level perspective 
to ground us, but also benefitted from her creative spirit and knack 
for innovation. She is an architect and keeper of the Dean Team brand, 
instilling in our community a sense that representation begins with 
listening and a renewed faith in their government.
  Preferring to work behind the scenes, Sam is quick to share kudos and 
credit, but her invisible hand left its mark in every aspect of our 
work. She is a skilled manager who built and led a pioneering 
communications team by identifying potential, carving out space for 
creativity, and challenging herself and others to do their best. When 
pitching a communications idea to Sam, her colleagues have learned to 
have a better strategy than, ``this is the way it has always been 
done! She has helped countless staffers grow into communications 
thinkers, coaching even the wonkiest members of our team on meeting--
and making--moments.
  From Good Morning America to the Star Tribune, Sam has been there to 
help pitch, prep, and powder my nose for moments big and small. Under 
her leadership, our communications team became a branding powerhouse, 
crafting powerful messages, landing big interviews, producing 
captivating content, building a mass communications program so strong I 
regularly receive thanks from constituents on the receiving end of 
unsolicited emails, and even going viral for a TikTok dance or two. Sam 
did it all with an eye for authenticity and improvement, and each 
success became a new foundation on which to build.
  Her work helped earn me a seat at the leadership table in 2022 when I 
was elected Co-Chair of the House Democratic Policy and Communications 
Committee (DPCC), and her reimagining of communications staffing and 
budgets has been recognized by the Chief Administrative Officer (CAO) 
of the House as best in class. Sam has been invited by the CAO to coach 
new Chiefs of Staff on modernizing their own communications teams, 
leadership that will surely leave this institution operating better 
than she found it for generations to come.

  In addition to her many professional talents, Sam is a genuine and 
thoughtful human, pottery aficionado, gluten-free bread enthusiast, and 
were all better for having served alongside her.
  The people of Minnesotas Third Congressional District were lucky to 
have her dedication and leadership, and she is dearly missed. However, 
Im extraordinarily happy that she will continue to do this work and 
serve the Nation and the people Minnesota at the Minnesota Department 
of Education. I wish Sam all the best in her future endeavors and thank 
her for six years of faithful service to this Nation.
I rise today to recognize my Director of 
Scheduling and Operations, Mae Hougo, for her work on behalf of every 
constituent in Minnesotas Third Congressional District. I could not be 
more proud or grateful for her service.
  Mae was raised in Minnesota and graduated from Cretin-Derham Hall. 
She ventured off to attend the College of Holy Cross where she earned 
her Bachelor of Arts in Political Science and Government. Maes passion 
for politics led her to many interesting and informative experiences 
that ranged from City Hall in Saint Paul, the Minnesota State Capitol, 
and Washington, D.C. Her experience of both campaigns and official side 
work have been invaluable.
  Mae has worked as a political scheduler for over five years in 
Minnesota. Her unofficial title is the ``keeper of space and time. 
From busy session weeks, to packed August recesses, if things were 
going smoothly for my team and me, it was due to Maes tireless work. 
Her foresight and creative thinking in a pinch saved each of us from 
more than our fair share of mishaps. Her colleagues will always 
remember Maes organized and strategic thinking. Mae is dependable, 
determined, fiercely passionate about the work, and incredibly 
hardworking.
  Mae has grown her role immensely during her tenure in this office--
she began her time with us as District Scheduler and ended it as 
Director of Scheduling and Operations, overseeing the scheduling 
process in both Minnesota and Washington, D.C. Maes sound judgment and 
critical thinking have led her to become a trusted advisor to me. Her 
talent combined with her heart for the work have made her an invaluable 
part of this team.
  The people of Minnesotas Third Congressional District were lucky to 
have her dedication and leadership, and she will be dearly missed. I 
wish Mae all the best in her future endeavors and thank her for five 
years of faithful service to this Nation in my office.
I rise today in recognition of Mr. Steve 
Yeakel, who is retiring as President and CEO of the Virginia 
Association of Community Banks (VACB) after 13 years of distinguished 
service to Virginias community banking industry.
  Throughout his tenure, Mr. Yeakel has been an unwavering advocate for 
Virginias community banks, which serve as the economic backbone of our 
local communities. Under his leadership, VACB has grown to represent 
more than 100 community banks and vendor partners, providing essential 
financial services to families and businesses across the great 
Commonwealth of Virginia. Mr. Yeakels commitment to excellence was 
recognized by his peers when he received the 2021 CEO Award of 
Excellence by from the Virginia Society of Association Executives. His 
leadership style, emphasizing relationship-building and collaborative 
problem-solving, has strengthened the voice of community banking in 
both Richmond and Washington. During his stewardship, VACB successfully 
navigated serious challenges in the industry, from regulatory changes 
to technological transformation. Mr. Yeakel has been able to achieve 
such impressive accomplishments particularly due to his ability to 
foster productive dialogue between VACB members and Congressional 
delegations over the years.
, I ask you to join me in recognizing Mr. Yeakels 
significant contributions to Virginias banking industry and the 
communities it serves. His legacy of leadership, advocacy, and service 
will continue to benefit Virginians for years to come. I wish him and 
his family all the best in his well-deserved retirement.
I ask for the Houses attention 
today to recognize the 70th birthday of Gerald Morris. Gerald was born 
to Emma Lois and Toby Lee Morris on December 4, 1954, in Anniston, 
Alabama. He is one of six children. He graduated from Saks High School 
in 1972.
  On February 22, 1985, Gerald married Waltina Morris. They were 
blessed with five children and seven grandchildren.
  Gerald was inspired by his uncle, Edgar Morris, who was a tailor. He 
had his shop in downtown Anniston. Gerald worked at a mens clothing 
store named Phils Mens Store and began doing alterations for 
customers there. He attended trade school and opened his own shop in 
downtown Anniston named Morris Alterations in 1981. As life would have 
it, his son was able to open a mens clothing store right across the 
street from his own storefront. Two of Geralds daughters work 
alongside him daily.
  During the COVID-19 pandemic, Mr. Morris switched gears at the shop 
and began making a variety of popular masks that sold from Alabama to 
Connecticut. After the pandemic, work was busier than ever as people 
went back to their social engagements, proms and weddings, they needed 
his artful craft to make their clothing perfect for them.
  Gerald has been in business for almost 44 years and attributes his 
success to all of his hard work and loyal customers. He has no plans of 
retiring. Gerald and his store are a fixture of downtown Anniston and 
Gerald gives back to his community by helping local schools.
  The Morris family attends New Jerusalem AFM Church of God.
, please join me in recognizing Gerald on this milestone 
and wishing him a very happy birthday.
I rise today with a heavy heart to announce 
the passing of Gene R. Moffitt. Gene was an individual full of 
ambition, compassion and dedication towards his community. I urge us 
all to celebrate and remember the life of this incredible community 
leader, husband, friend, father, and grandfather.
  Born in Independence, Missouri on August 6, 1941, Gene attended 
William Chrisman High School before heading to Central Missouri State 
University to continue his academic journey. Eventually, he began what

would become a stellar career spanning across four decades at Block &amp; 
Company, Inc. Realtors. Starting at an entry level position as a Sales 
Associate in 1974, Gene was active in sales, leasing and development 
projects. Through the years, his expertise in the industry grew as he 
oversaw the completion of various projects in retail, office, 
commercial, and investment projects.
  As he continued to work his way up the ladder at Block &amp; Company, 
Inc. Realtors, Gene brought along his enthusiasm, knowledge and work 
ethic to create new approaches to real estate. Most notable, Gene 
became a leader in the industry when he initiated the first new life-
style center in the region, Zona Rosa, a mixed-use retail, office, and 
industrial complex in the Greater Kansas City area. His experience was 
sought after and highly regarded among those in the industry.
  Among his many achievements, Gene played an important role in 
relocating the St. Joseph Hospital, which later became the Linwood 
Shopping Center, revitalizing an inner-city area that was facing 
decline. The finished project became a new and expanded retail 
development which led to the City of Kansas City to be designated in 
1986 as an ``All American City by the Citizens Forum on Self 
Government/National Municipal League and USA Today. Additionally, Gene 
worked as the Development Consultant for the Blue Parkway Town Center, 
a redevelopment project spearheaded by the Swope Parkway Health Center.
  Though Gene has passed, his legacy and impact on Kansas City will 
remain long past our mortal lifetimes. I am reminded of Mark 10:45--
``For even the Son of Man did not come to be served, but to serve, and 
to give his life as a ransom for many. Genes life was one dedicated 
to serving others and bettering the lives of countless people. Gene is 
survived by his loving family, friends, and wife of 58 years, Pamela. 
As we celebrate and remember the decades of devoted service from Gene, 
let us be inspired by his commitment to better his community.