I rise today to commemorate the 
Chickahominy Indian Tribe in Charles City, Virginia.
  In 1607, the Chickahominy Indian Tribe was one of the few tribes to 
encounter settlers from the first permanent English settlement of 
Jamestown. The tribe helped the English survive and adapt to local 
conditions, trading food and teaching them how to grow and preserve 
crops. The Chickahominy Tribe originally lived in permanent villages 
along the Chickahominy River.
  Eventually, the English displaced the Chickahominy people and set 
aside land for them in the Pamunkey Neck area of Virginia through the 
Treaty of 1646. Slowly, the Chickahominy people migrated to the 
Chickahominy Ridge, an area between Richmond and Williamsburg only a 
few miles from one of their original 1607 village sides, where they now 
reside.
  In 1924, Virginias Racial Integrity Act created some of the most 
severe segregation policies in the nation. This act effectively erased 
Indians from official records, reclassifying them from Indian to 
`Colored. This erasure made it impossible for many years for Virginian 
Indian tribes to gain federal recognition, as they could not document 
ancestral continuity.
  In 2018, the Thomasina E. Jordan Indian Tribes of Virginia Federal 
Recognition Act granted federal recognition to six Indian tribes of 
Virginia, including the Chickahominy Tribe. This recognition provides 
the tribe with the legal, economic and cultural tools necessary to 
maintain their sovereignty and preserve their heritage.
  The Chickahominy Tribe is woven into the culture of the Charles City 
community. As the intersection of centuries of history and culture, the 
Chickahominy people are pivotal to the identity of the area. Today, the 
Chickahominy Tribe remains a vibrant and active part of Charles City 
through their traditions, language and cultural heritage.
  The legacy of the Chickahominy Tribe is a vital component of 
Virginias past and present. In honor of Native American Heritage 
Month, I recognize the important history and contributions of the 
Chickahominy Indian Tribe.
it is with a heavy heart and 
solemn remembrance that I rise today to honor and celebrate the life 
and legacy of an extraordinary husband, father, grandfather, military 
officer, counselor, fraternity brother, friend of longstanding and a 
man of deep faith, Captain (Ret.) Russell J. Scott, Sr. Sadly, Russell 
transitioned from labor to reward on Friday, November 22, 2024, at the 
age of 91.
  Russell J. Scott, Sr. was born in Quitman, Georgia, on December 3, 
1932, to the union of Robert J. Scott and Ezell Hollis Scott. He 
received his primary and secondary education in the public schools of 
Brooks and Ware Counties in Georgia. After graduating from Central High 
School in Waycross, Georgia, he matriculated at North Carolina A&amp;T in 
Greensboro, North Carolina, where he earned a Bachelor of Science 
Degree in General Science. He joined the United States Army where he 
served for 23 years exemplifying the Army Values of loyalty, duty, 
respect, selfless service, integrity, honor, and personal courage--
retiring with the rank of Captain. During his military career, he 
earned 2 Bronze Stars for exemplary service and was awarded the Army 
Commendation Medal, Vietnam Service Medal and the Vietnam Campaign 
Medal.
  Upon his retirement from the Army, in pursuit of further knowledge 
and mastery, Russell earned a masters degree in Foundations of 
Education and a masters degree in Criminal Justice at Troy State 
University, Phenix City branch. Armed with his additional academic 
preparation, Captain Scott embarked upon a second career with the 
Georgia Department of Corrections as a counselor and later as Assistant 
Superintendent at Rutledge State Prison in Columbus, Georgia, where he 
worked with my wife, Vivian Creighton Bishop, who served as 
Comptroller. He retired from the Georgia Department of Corrections 
after 17 years of service.
  Russell was a man of deep faith and was a devoted member of St. James 
AME Church where he served in many capacities including Vice Chair of 
the Steward Board, Senior Usher Board, Mass Choir, Sons of Allen, among 
others. He was a proud member of Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity, Inc. for 
72 years and was an active member of the Columbus, Georgia Alumni 
Chapter. Moreover, he was actively involved in numerous community 
service and humanitarian organizations such as the Southern Poverty Law 
Center, NAACP, American Red Cross, and the Urban League. Always 
striving for excellence, he received several awards for his 
distinguished community service to include the 2003 Kappa Alpha Psi 
Columbus Alumni Chapter Man of the Year; 2004 AJ McClung award for 
meritorious service presented by the men of St. James AME Church; the 
2017 Chattahoochee Valley Veterans Association Veteran of the Year 
Award and in January 2019 the St. James AME Church Sons of Allen Man of 
the Year Award.
  Russell Scott was a family man and was first united in marriage to 
the late Loris Brooks. Together, they had three children, LaReese 
Vines, Tina Scott-Morgan and Russell J. Scott, Jr. After Loriss 
passing in 1999, he found love again with Ruth Glenn Scott, whom he 
married in 2001 and welcomed bonus children, Regina Stokes and Clifford

Glenn. Russell loved his blended family and was a doting grandfather to 
grandchildren Russell J. Scott, III, Marissa D. Morgan and Rysen Jai 
Scott, along with several bonus grandchildren.
  On a personal note, Russell Scott was a dear friend to my wife, 
Vivian, and me for many years. He was my Brother in the Bond of Kappa 
Alpha Psi Fraternity, Inc. and truly exemplified our motto of Phi Nu 
Pi. During his life, he did so much for so many for so long. Truly, we 
and the world are better because of him.
, I ask my colleagues in the U.S. House of Representatives 
to join Vivian and me, along with the more than 765,000 people of 
Georgias Second Congressional District, in honoring the life and 
legacy of Captain (Ret.) Russell James Scott, Sr. and in extending our 
deepest sympathy to his family, friends, fraternity brothers and all 
who mourn his loss. We pray that all will be consoled and comforted by 
an abiding faith and the Holy Spirit in the weeks, months, and years 
ahead.
I rise today to honor my 
Senior District Representative, Rebecca Hermosillo, as she embarks on a 
new chapter of public service. Rebecca has made history as the first 
Latina elected to the Sonoma County Board of Supervisors, and I have no 
doubt she will continue to serve our community with the same tenacity, 
compassion, and dedication that have defined her career.
  Born to Mexican immigrants in the Sonoma Valley, Rebecca was raised 
on the Leveroni Dairy. As the youngest of seven children, Rebecca 
learned early on the values of hard work and determination. Her 
parents, Camilo and Maria, instilled in her a deep respect for her 
heritage, as well as a sense of responsibility for her community. After 
becoming a mother at a young age, Rebecca was determined to complete 
her education. She earned her GED in 1991, becoming the first in her 
family to graduate from college, achieving a bachelors degree in 
public administration from Park University.
  Rebeccas commitment to community service then began with her role as 
Executive Director of the Valley of the Moon Teen Center, where she 
provided a safe and supportive space for at-risk youth. Under her 
leadership, the center created innovative programs like ``Outdoors to 
Excellence, ``Skills for Life, and ``Lovin Oven, all designed to 
help teens develop practical skills, foster confidence, and cultivate a 
sense of belonging. Her dedication to our teens of Sonoma Valley, and 
her hands-on approach, made a lasting difference in the lives of 
countless young people.
  In 2013, Rebecca joined my team, beginning as a Constituent Services 
Representative and rising to the role of Senior District 
Representative. Her service to our district over the last decade has 
been defined by her ability to connect with constituents and resolve 
their issues that have earned her deep respect from both her colleagues 
and her community. Over the course of her tenure, Rebecca personally 
handled 2,868 cases for our constituents and helped recoup 
$4,734,703.82 for our district. Rebeccas fluency in Spanish and her 
understanding of Sonoma Countys Latino population has made her an 
invaluable advocate, particularly for constituents navigating complex 
immigration issues, DACA renewals, and access to government services.
  With her recent election to the Sonoma County Board of Supervisors, 
Rebecca has made history becoming the first Latina to serve on the 
board. She steps into this role at a pivotal time, representing our 
First District, which includes a significant portion of Sonoma Countys 
Latino community. Rebeccas priorities include expanding access to 
county services, offering evening office hours at the new County 
Services Center, and bridging gaps in representation for residents in 
unincorporated areas like The Springs.
, my staff, and the people of our district are deeply 
grateful for Rebecca Hermosillos years of service to our community. It 
is my honor to recognize her extraordinary achievements and to commend 
her dedication to public service. We are excited to see all she will 
accomplish in this new chapter of her career, and we are confident that 
she will continue to be a voice for positive change and equity in our 
community.
I rise today to honor 
UpValley Family Centers for their 25th anniversary and outstanding 
service in promoting equity and access to social resources throughout 
Napa County.
  Since its founding in 1999, UpValley Family Centers have supported 
working families in the greater Calistoga and St. Helena area, offering 
prevention and intervention services at a local level. They serve over 
4,000 people annually. Last year, ninety-four percent of those served 
fell below the median income for Napa County. Sixty percent were women, 
and fifty-six percent were Spanish speakers. The family center itself 
provides a variety of programs from assisting residents with accessing 
health insurance and housing resources to playgroups and family 
support. UpValley also collaborates with over 40 partner organizations 
to help engage residents and increase access to services locally.
  Over their 25 years of service, UpValley Family Centers programs 
have made significant long-term impacts. As a Department of Justice 
recognized organization, UpValley has helped over 2,000 people become 
U.S. citizens in tandem with the Napa Citizenship Legal Services. They 
have increased early literacy, socialization and school readiness 
skills in over 1,000 young children through weekly bilingual 
playgroups. Children participating in their youth mentoring services 
are more likely to meet requirements needed to attend a 4-year college. 
Thousands of low-income households have benefitted from their free VITA 
tax filing program, accessing over $11 million in tax credits and 
refunds. They distributed over $2.1 million in emergency funds stemming 
from the pandemic and LNU Complex wildfire-related hardships, which 
reached over 800 households.
  UpValley Family Centers also participates in broader civic 
initiatives throughout Napa County. As part of the Drug-Free 
Communities Initiative, they partnered with local officials and helped 
pass social host ordinances in Calistoga and St. Helena. And in 2020, 
they served as trusted messengers alongside other Napa County-based 
community organizations to increase participation in the 2020 Census. 
Napa County saw a 2 percent increase in census participation as a 
result of their efforts.
, we thank UpValley Family Centers for their dedicated 
service to our Napa County community. Therefore, it is fitting and 
proper that we honor them here today.