. 
The Twin Cities have experienced 10 days over 90 degrees this summer, 
and wildfire smoke has resulted in 18 air quality alerts, nearing the 
record of 22 days in 2023. This is not a fluke. Its a sign of a 
worsening climate crisis that threatens our life, health, safety and 
economic security.
  Instead of investing in solutions to this crisis, the Republican 
majority in Congress is advancing legislation that would raise energy 
costs for American households and businesses, make us less competitive 
and weaken our national security.
  Last month, the House Appropriations Committee passed H.R. 4553, the 
fiscal year 2026 Energy and Water Appropriations bill. As the only 
Minnesotan on the Appropriations Committee, I will vote against 
advancing this bill. Its cuts will harm Minnesota and our Nation.
  Our global competitors like China are investing hundreds of billions 
of dollars in clean-energy development, but Republicans are choosing to 
cut U.S. investments that create high-wage jobs, drive innovation and 
lower energy bills for Americans. Republicans bill slashes energy 
efficiency and renewable energy programs at the Department of Energy by 
$1.6 billion, a staggering 47 percent cut. For Minnesota, this cut 
means well lose over $6.7 million in federal funding if Republicans 
Energy and Water bill becomes law.
  If that wasnt bad enough, Republicans on the Appropriations 
Committee voted for a 44 percent cut to the Weatherization Assistance 
Program, which helps low-income households lower their utility bills by 
improving home energy efficiency. This program helps roughly 1,200 
Minnesotans weatherize their homes each year, saving families about 
$372 annually on their energy bills. While most U.S. households spend 3 
percent of their income on energy costs, low-income households often 
spend 15 percent or more. Under the MAGA Republican plan, many senior 
citizens and families would be forced to choose between buying 
groceries or cooling their homes during record-breaking heat.
  It could get even worse for these families. President Donald Trump 
has proposed eliminating funding for the Low-Income Home Energy 
Assistance Program (LIHEAP). Trump calls LIHEAP ``unnecessary, but 
for thousands of Minnesotans, it is a lifeline that helps to keep the 
heat on during our brutal winters.
  As House Republicans Energy and Water bill increases Minnesotans 
energy costs, their funding cuts will have a chilling effect on clean-
energy jobs--a sector that has been growing five times faster than 
Minnesotas overall job growth. More than 62,000 Minnesotans work in 
clean energy, and more than 44,000 of them work in energy efficiency. 
More than 300 local contractors alone work on projects directly 
supported by the Weatherization Assistance Program.
  Since taking office, Trump has been jeopardizing clean-energy jobs in 
Minnesota by terminating clean-energy incentives in his so-called ``One 
Big Beautiful Bill, canceling grants and illegally withholding funds 
from state, local and tribal governments. These actions are stalling 
clean-energy projects and eliminating high-wage jobs.
  The Trump administration is also attacking workforce development for 
clean energy. In May, the Department of Labor shut down Job Corps, 
closing the doors of the Hubert H. Humphrey Job Corps Center in St. 
Paul. For 44 years, Job Corps provided job training, education and 
housing for thousands of low-income, at-risk youth, preparing 
Minnesotas workforce to meet the challenges and opportunities of the 
21st century, including jobs in renewable energy and efficiency.
  We cannot afford to abandon these investments during a worsening 
climate crisis. American families are already struggling with high 
energy bills. But the need to develop our own homegrown clean and 
sustainable energy isnt just a matter of economic security; its also 
about our national security.
  The Department of Defense considers climate change to be a top 
national security concern. Climate change is making nations around the 
world more unstable and less safe. Its also hurting our military 
readiness here at home, with sea-level rise and extreme weather 
flooding our bases. Permafrost thaw is making Alaskan runways unusable. 
Radar stations are at risk of falling into the sea.
, we dont have the luxury of ignoring the very real effects 
of climate change happening around us--especially when theyre 
affecting our lives and livelihoods and our national security. Future 
generations will pay the highest costs of Republicans failure to act.
  As a Minnesota representative, I will fight to defend these critical 
investments because Minnesotans deserve better. The children deserve 
better.
I rise today to honor an 
outstanding Mississippian, Mr. Daryl Richards, Jr., for his dedication, 
leadership, and service to the elders of the Mississippi Delta as the 
Area Agency on Aging (AAA) Director for the South Delta Planning and 
Development District (SDPDD).
, the heart of the 
Mississippi Delta. A proud graduate of Greenville-Weston High School, 
Class of 2010, he went on to attend the University of Mississippi, 
where he earned dual degrees in Political Science and Business 
Administration. He later pursued graduate studies at Belhaven 
University, earning a Master of Business Administration.
  During his junior year of college, Mr. Richards began an internship 
with the SDPDD. A few years later, after gaining management experience 
in the private sector, he was called back to serve his community. In 
2019, at the age of 27, he was appointed as Director--becoming the 
youngest AAA Director in both the history of the District and the State 
of Mississippi.
  In this role, Mr. Richards has embraced his calling to be a voice for 
Mississippis elderly population. Under his leadership, the Agency 
provides critical services to seniors and their families across thirty-
five municipalities and six counties. These include congregate meal 
sites, home-delivered meals, homemaker services, respite care, legal 
assistance, ombudsman services, adult day care, State Health Insurance 
Assistance, access to care programs, preventative health classes, elder 
abuse prevention, and a range of information and referral resources. 
Through these efforts, Mr. Richards and his team ensure that the most 
vulnerable members of our communities are not forgotten.
Martin Luther King, Jr., 
``What are you doing for others? This guiding principle motivates him 
daily to advocate for those who cannot

advocate for themselves. His commitment reflects not only in his 
professional service but also in his extensive community involvement. 
He is actively engaged with Walking in Love Ministries, has served as 
Chairman of the Community Foundation of Washington County, is Treasurer 
of 100 Black Men of the Mississippi Delta, Presidential Director of 
Delta Council, a board member of the Washington County United Way, a 
Mississippi Aging TAC Member, and a board member of the Three Rivers 
CDE Advisory Board.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in celebrating Mr. Daryl 
Richards, Jr., for his tireless service to the people of the 
Mississippi Delta. He stands as a shining example of leadership, 
compassion, and commitment, and he continues to make a lasting 
difference in the lives of our elders and their families.
I rise today to recognize the National 
Society Daughters of American Revolution (NSDAR), Towamencin Chapter, 
which is an organization in my district. The NSDAR was founded in 1890 
to promote Historic Preservation, Education, and Patriotism across the 
United States. Members seek to honor their heritage as daughters of 
Patriots who supported the Revolutionary War while making a difference 
in their communities.
  The Towamencin Chapter, NSDAR has collaborated with the William G. 
Pomeroy Foundation in their initiative to celebrate the 
semiquincentennial of our Nation in 2026. This program offers grants to 
commemorate historical points of interest significant to the 
Revolutionary War period. The Towamencin Chapter, NSDAR, along with the 
assistance of the Hatfield Historical Society and Museum, were grateful 
that one of the historical sites chosen belonged to Lieutenant Colonel 
(Lt. Col.) Jacob Reed, a Patriot from Hatfield, Pennsylvania.
  Lt. Col. Jacob Reed was born on July 6, 1730, in Philadelphia County, 
Pennsylvania. He died on November 2, 1820, in New Britain Township, 
Pennsylvania. He married Magdalena Leidy and had 9 children together. 
Jacob Reed came from a very patriotic family with his father paying the 
Supply Tax in 1781 in Hatfield Township and all his brothers and 
brothers-in-law participating in the Revolutionary War. Two of his sons 
also fought in the Revolutionary War.
  Lt. Col. Jacob Reed resided in Hatfield from 1770 to 1793, having 
secured a 215-acre land warrant from the sons of William Penn. His 
original log home, built in the 18th century, still stands today as 
part of the current farmhouse on the property.
  A respected farmer, church elder, and public servant, Jacob Reeds 
legacy is deeply embedded in the fabric of Hatfields history. During 
the Revolutionary War, he served as Lieutenant Colonel of the 1st 
Battalion, Philadelphia County Militia, making him the highest-ranking 
military officer from Hatfield at the time. He played critical roles in 
the Battles of Germantown and Brandywine, and was later elected Major 
of the 5th Battalion, Pennsylvania Troops, continuing his service until 
the wars end.
  His unwavering faith in the American cause had brought attacks on 
Reeds life and home. Yet, Jacob Reed never swayed. Reeds intimate 
knowledge of the regions terrain and demographics proved to secure him 
as an invaluable asset to General George Washington.
  Additionally, the Forst family who are members of our district, were 
instrumental in saving this property from development. Bill Forst 
bought the property and then used his own funds and time to restore the 
property to what it is today. The property has now passed to his 
daughters, Wendy Forst Ferrell and Fay Forst Younger, who allowed the 
Towamencin Chapter, NSDAR to install the marker on their property as 
well as hold a dedication ceremony recognizing the contributions of Lt. 
Col. Jacob Reed and his willingness to fight for his beliefs.
  Through these acts of endless patriotism and dedication, the Forst 
family, Daughters of the Revolution, Towamencin Chapter, William G. 
Pomeroy Foundation, and the Hatfield Historical Society demonstrated 
their unwavering commitment to serving the Pennsylvanias 1st 
Congressional District community.
I rise today to recognize September as 
Prostate Cancer Awareness Month. Prostate cancer is the second leading 
cause of cancer death among American men, with one in eight men 
receiving diagnosis in their lifetime. This disease also affects 
African American men at higher rates. Yet through early detection and 
effective medical treatment, many men can lead fulfilling lives. This 
month emphasizes the importance of regular doctors visits and testing 
as well as reminds us of the need to normalize open and honest 
conversations with our loved

ones about their health. We can eradicate this deadly disease through 
continued awareness, elevating stories, and supporting innovative 
research for the men we hold dear in our lives.
  While the fight is far from over. it is incumbent upon us to do our 
part. As the daughter of a brave survivor of prostate cancer, 
recognizing September as Prostate Cancer Awareness Month is a small 
token of appreciation for all that have taken part in this fight 
against this disease. Today, I uplift my father, Joseph Crockett, and 
all prostate cancer survivors who are living testimonies of overcoming 
one of lifes most challenging experiences. I also honor all we have 
lost, knowing their deaths are not in vain, but instead strengthen our 
resolve for finding a cure. Their tenacious spirit lives within all of 
us.
I rise today to recognize and honor the 
life of Jennifer Fuhs, a beloved mother, grandmother, and fighter from 
Lewiston, Idaho, who is courageously facing the final stages of her 
battle with cancer.
  Jennifer dedicated her career as a compassionate defense attorney, 
advocating for individuals in Lewiston who faced uncertain life 
circumstances. She approached her work with empathy and conviction, 
always seeking fairness and justice for those in need.
  Beyond her professional service, Jennifer is a devoted mother to her 
five children and a proud grandmother to her four grandchildren, whom 
she adores deeply. She is witty, organized, hardworking, and spunky, 
and she carries a spirit of generosity that inspires everyone around 
her. She loves to laugh, spend time with her friends and family, and 
she lives each day with purpose and joy.
  Her strength and grace in the face of illness is a source of 
inspiration, not only to her loved ones but to her entire community. 
She embodies the very best of the American spirit--resilience, 
compassion, and unwavering love for others.
  I ask my colleagues to join me in honoring Jennifer Fuhs for the life 
she lives, the example she has set, and the legacy she continues to 
build. May she be surrounded with peace, comfort, and the knowledge 
that her impact will endure for generations.
I rise today to recognize Terry Bowen as 
she retires from her role with Gray-Bowen-Scott.
  Teresa Bowen has worked tirelessly to bring transportation and 
development initiatives to life throughout the Bay Area. She graduated 
from U.C. Berkeley with a degree in Civil Engineering and began her 
career with Contra Costa Public Works Department, where she served as a 
Senior Civil Engineer. In 1986, Terry joined what is now known as Gray-
Bowen-Scott as the organizations fourth employee. Throughout her 
tenure with Gray-Bowen-Scott, she has lent her expertise in local 
government to help countless clients navigate the system to make their 
projects a reality. Terry has fostered relationships with key partners 
such as Caltrans, the Federal Highway Administration, the California 
Transportation Commission, and other regional transportation agencies. 
She prides herself on the strong relationships shes built with these 
stakeholders and her work has helped to deliver transportation and land 
development projects for our community for over forty years. 
Additionally, Terry was instrumental in the Sunol Grade Express Lane 
Project in Alameda County. Throughout this project, Terry worked 
closely with environmental groups, advocated for necessary state 
legislation, and secured funding to help complete the first express 
lane project in the Bay Area. Her work on this has set a precedent for 
how these projects are handled throughout the region. Terrys approach 
has demonstrated collaborative, creative problem-solving to address 
complex transportation issues.
  Beyond her work at Gray-Bowen-Scott. Terry previously served as Chair 
of the East Bay Leadership Council, where she further demonstrated her 
commitment to improving quality of life for Bay Area residents and 
bolstering our regions economy. Outside of her professional 
accomplishments, Terry enjoys seeking out new learning opportunities, a 
good red wine, dancing, and spoiling her four-legged friends. Terrys 
work has been critical in shaping our region and her leadership has 
left an indelible impact on our community.
  Please join me in congratulating Terry Bowen on her retirement after 
decades of dedicated service and wishing her well as she begins this 
new chapter.
I missed the Roll Call vote on H.J. Res. 
106. Had I been present, I would have voted YEA on Roll Call No. 225.
I rise today to recognize Sadie Pirez of 
Readington, New Jersey, who has been recognized nationally as a 
Chevrolet Play Ball Player of the Month by Major League Baseball. This 
program highlights outstanding young athletes across the country who 
demonstrate exceptional talent, sportsmanship, and dedication to the 
game. Sadie has achieved remarkable success both on and off the field. 
She has been a part of three championship teams over the past three 
seasons and was selected for the Branchburg Recreation Spring 2025 All-
Star Team. Sadie led her travel team to the Parkway League Spring 
Division Championship and was team leader in runs scored and RBIs, 
carrying an impressive .521 batting average and .662 on-base percentage 
this past spring.
  Off the field, Sadie is a two-time Hunterdon Art Museum Young Artist 
Award recipient and has been featured in the Holland Brook School 
Bobcat Bulletin. She also maintains straight As in all core subjects. 
I invite my colleagues to join me in honoring Sadie and her remarkable 
achievements, and I look forward to seeing Sadie continue to be 
successful both on and off the field for years to come.
I rise today to recognize Mr. Dan 
Houston on the occasion of his retirement and to honor his more than 40 
years of service at Principal Financial Group. From his first role in 
the retirement division to serving as Chairman, President, and Chief 
Executive Officer, Dan has exemplified steady leadership, a deep sense 
of responsibility, and a commitment to doing right by others. His 
career reflects the integrity and work ethic that define our state.
  Throughout his four decades at Principal, Dan helped guide the 
company through times of change and growth while staying true to its 
mission of serving everyday Americans. Under his leadership, Principal 
remained a reliable partner for working families and small businesses, 
helping them prepare for the future, plan for retirement, and weather 
economic uncertainty. He championed a people-first approach to 
financial services that created long-term security for those Principal 
served.
  Beyond the workplace, Dan remains a strong supporter of education, 
civic engagement, and local leadership. He serves on the boards of the 
Iowa Business Council, the Greater Des Moines Partnership, the Iowa 
State University College of Business, the Partnership for a Healthier 
America, and the Community Foundation of Greater Des Moines. Through 
these roles, he continues to lift others up and strengthen the 
communities we call home.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in thanking Dan Houston 
for his commitment to Iowa, his more than 40 years of service at 
Principal Financial Group, and in wishing him well as he steps into 
this new chapter.
Title IV of Senate Resolution 4, agreed to by the Senate of February 
4, 1977, calls for establishment of a system for a computerized 
schedule of all meetings and hearings of Senate committees, 
subcommittees, joint committees, and committees of conference. This 
title requires all such committees to notify the Office of the Senate 
Daily Digest--designated by the Rules Committee--of the time, place and 
purpose of the meetings, when scheduled and any cancellations or 
changes in the meetings as they occur.
  As an additional procedure along with the computerization of this 
information, the Office of the Senate Daily Digest will prepare this 
information for printing in the Extensions of Remarks section of the 
Congressional Record on Monday and Wednesday of each week.
  Meetings scheduled for Tuesday, September 9, 2025 may be found in the 
Daily Digest of todays Record.

     10 a.m.
       Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs
         Business meeting to consider the nomination of Stephen 
           Miran, of New York, to be a Member of the Board of 
           Governors of the Federal Reserve System; to be 
           immediately followed by a hearing to examine evaluating 
           perspectives on deposit insurance reform.
                                                            SD-538
       Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation
       Subcommittee on Science, Manufacturing, and Competitiveness
         To hold hearings to examine Americas AI action plan.
                                                            SR-253
       Committee on Environment and Public Works
         To hold hearings to examine a discussion draft of the 
           Wildfire Emissions Prevention Act, and S. 881, to amend 
           the Clean Air Act to include fuel for ocean-going 
           vessels as additional renewable fuel for which credits 
           may be generated under the renewable fuel program.
                                                            SD-562
       Committee on Finance
         To hold hearings to examine the nominations of Jonathan 
           Greenstein, of New York, to be a Deputy Under 
           Secretary, and Donald Korb, of Ohio, to be Chief 
           Counsel for the Internal Revenue Service and an 
           Assistant General Counsel, both of the Department of 
           the Treasury.
                                                            SD-215
     2:30 p.m.
       Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
       Subcommittee on Disaster Management, District of Columbia, 
           and Census
         To hold hearings to examine Americas fire apparatus 
           crisis.
                                                            SD-342
       Committee on Indian Affairs
         Business meeting to consider the nomination of William 
           Kirkland, of Georgia, to be an Assistant Secretary of 
           the Interior; to be immediately followed by hearings to 
           examine Federal programs at the Department of Energy.
                                                            SD-628
       Committee on Small Business and Entrepreneurship
         To hold hearings to examine the nomination of William 
           Kirk, of Maryland, to be Inspector General, Small 
           Business Administration.
                                                           SR-428A
       Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe
         To hold hearings to examine Georgias anti-American turn.
                                                        2358C-RHOB
     3 p.m.
       Select Committee on Intelligence
         To receive a closed briefing on certain intelligence 
           matters.
                                                            SH-219
     4 p.m.
       Committee on Veterans Affairs
         To hold hearings to examine a pending nomination.
                                                            SR-418

     9 a.m.
       Committee on Energy and Natural Resources
         Business meeting to consider S. 472, to amend the Omnibus 
           Parks and Public Lands Management Act of 1996 to 
           provide for the establishment of a Ski Area Fee 
           Retention Account, S. 1279, to redesignate the Hulls 
           Cove Visitor Center at Acadia National Park as the 
           George J. Mitchell Visitor Center, S. 1453, to confirm 
           the use of certain non-Federal land in Salt Lake City, 
           Utah, for public purposes, S. 909 and H.R. 1043, bills 
           to authorize the Secretary of the Interior to convey 
           certain land to La Paz County, Arizona, and the 
           nominations of Laura Swett, of Virginia, and David 
           LaCerte, of Louisiana, both to be a Member of the 
           Federal Energy Regulatory Commission.
                                                            SD-366
     9:15 a.m.
       Committee on Armed Services
         To hold hearings to examine the nomination of General 
           Christopher J. Mahoney, USMC, for reappointment to the 
           grade of general and to be Vice Chairman of the Joint 
           Chiefs of Staff.
                                                            SD-G50
     10:15 a.m.
       Committee on the Judiciary
         Business meeting to consider the nominations of Joshua D. 
           Dunlap, of Maine, to be United States Circuit Judge for 
           the First Circuit, Eric Chunyee Tung, of California, to 
           be United States Circuit Judge for the Ninth Circuit, 
           William W. Mercer, to be United States District Judge 
           for the District of Montana, Stephen Chad Meredith, to 
           be United States District Judge for the Eastern 
           District of Kentucky, Arch Capito, to be United States 
           Attorney for the Southern District of West Virginia for 
           the term of four years, David Dunavant, to be United 
           States Attorney for the Western District of Tennessee 
           for the term of four years, Matthew Harvey, to be 
           United States Attorney for the Northern District of 
           West Virginia for the term of four years, John Heekin, 
           to be United States Attorney for the Northern District 
           of Florida for the term of four years, Scott Leary, to 
           be United States Attorney for the Northern District of 
           Mississippi for the term of four years, Leif Olson, to 
           be United States Attorney for the Northern District of 
           Iowa for the term of four years, Adam Sleeper, to be 
           United States Attorney for the District of the Virgin 
           Islands for the term of four years, and David Toepfer, 
           to be United States Attorney for the Northern District 
           of Ohio for the term of four years.
                                                            SH-216
     10:30 a.m.
       Committee on Foreign Relations
         Business meeting to consider the nominations of Julie 
           Stufft, of Ohio, to be Ambassador to the Republic of 
           Kazakhstan, Sean ONeill, of Virginia, to be Ambassador 
           to the Kingdom of Thailand, Michel Issa, of Florida, to 
           be Ambassador to the Lebanese Republic, John Giordano, 
           of Pennsylvania, to be Ambassador to the Republic of 
           Namibia, and Richard Buchan III, of Florida, to be 
           Ambassador to the Kingdom

           of Morocco, all of the Department of State; to be 
           immediately followed by a hearing to examine certain 
           pending nominations.
                                                            SD-419

     2:30 p.m.
       Committee on Indian Affairs
         To hold hearings to examine Indian Self-Determination and 
           Education Assistance Act successes and opportunities at 
           the Department of the Interior and the Indian Health 
           Service.
                                                            SD-628

     9:30 a.m.
       Committee on Appropriations
         Business meeting to markup ``Department of Homeland 
           Security Appropriations Act, 2026.
                                                            SD-106