I rise today to recognize and celebrate the 
200th anniversary of the City of Washington, Illinois, a proud and 
resilient community I am honored to represent.
  Founded in 1825 by blacksmith William Holland, Washington began as 
Hollands Grove and was renamed in 1837 to honor President George 
Washington. The city quickly grew, electing its first town president in 
1839, officially incorporating in 1857, and reorganizing as a city in 
1878 with Peter Fifer as its first mayor.
  Washington holds a strong connection to Abraham Lincoln, who visited 
often while traveling the Tenth Judicial Circuit. In 1857, he defended 
two residents accused of helping escaped slaves along the Underground 
Railroad, marking a powerful moment in the citys history.
  Washington later gained national recognition through George Heyls 
pony farm, home to champion Shetland ponies including King Larigo and 
Creations King. The original barns still stand on North Main Street as 
a tribute to that chapter.
  The citys strength was tested in 2013, when a powerful EF-4 tornado 
destroyed more than one thousand structures and took the lives of three 
residents. In the aftermath, the people of Washington came together 
with courage and compassion, rebuilding stronger than ever.
  Today, Washington is home to more than 16,000 residents. The city has 
become a destination for visitors who annually flock to its Good 
Neighbor Days festival in the spring and to the quaint locally owned 
businesses occupying century-old buildings lining its historic downtown 
square.
  I congratulate the City of Washington on its bicentennial and commend 
its citizens for carrying forward a legacy of perseverance, service, 
and pride. I look forward to its continued success in the years ahead.
I rise today to honor two 
selfless, hardworking constituents from Salisbury, Maryland, Mr. Jeff 
and Mrs. Diana Merritt. They began Operation We Care in 2007, an 
organization providing more than 2,000 care packages annually to 
deployed military personnel. They also work to

support police and first responders in several counties throughout the 
First Congressional District.
  The work of organizations such as Operation We Care is incredibly 
meaningful and important to our military and first responders. I would 
like to thank Mr. and Mrs. Merritt for supporting those in our 
community that work to keep us safe at home and abroad.
  I wish Mr. and Mrs. Merritt the best of luck in continuing their 
efforts to make Marylands First Congressional District better in every 
way.
I congratulate Anne 
Matthews, the first female Vice President of Rotary International, on 
being awarded South Carolinas highest civilian award, The Order of the 
Palmetto.
  Authorized by Governor Henry McMaster, The Order of the Palmetto is 
awarded to the States most accomplished and esteemed individuals who 
make a significant contribution to a particular community. Anne 
represents all that this award entails as she has devoted her life to 
helping those in need.
  As a fellow Rotarian myself, I have witnessed Anne dedicate her life 
to serving the people of South Carolina and beyond in many capacities 
in business, Rotary International, and more.
  Having degrees from Coker College, Appalachian State University, and 
a doctorate from the University of South Carolina, Anne also excelled 
in education, including as President of the National Business Education 
Association.
  Additionally, she served as president, chair, and/or board member of 
numerous national and state boards, promoting and speaking across 
America and internationally on critical educational issues and the need 
to serve the less fortunate.
  Anne has worked in 73 countries, championing humanitarian efforts, 
and promoting South Carolina values. Notably, as chair of the Polio 
Eradication Advocacy Task Force for America, where we worked together 
with other members of Congress to raise over four billion dollars for 
the global fight against Polio.
  Anne embodies leadership, compassion, and service. She has achieved 
many accomplishments and has contributed greatly to the state.
  I send my warmest congratulations and best wishes. I am appreciative 
for all she has done for South Carolina.
I rise today to honor the amazing 
sporting clays achievements of Connor Daniel.
  Connor has been competing worldwide representing team USA in England 
and Cyprus.
  While competing Connor placed in the top 20 both times overall and 
won the World English Sporting Junior Championship and the World FITASC 
championship.
  Connor was also a member of the USA team which took home the World 
English Sporting Junior and World FITASC Junior team championships.
  His performances in these tournaments earned him the FITASC Junior 
World Cup as well.
  Connor has also recently committed to Georgia Southern to compete on 
their clay shooting team.
  Today, we celebrate Connor and his amazing achievements in the world 
of clay shooting.
I rise today to recognize the 
late Larry Stokes, who passed away on July 10, 2025.
. He dedicated his life to education and influenced 
countless students during his tenure at the University.
  Because of his unwavering commitment, Dr. Stokes will be fondly 
remembered for his contributions to academia. He is also known for 
fostering a love of learning within his classroom and amongst students.
  His life was marked by his marriage to The Honorable Judge Tammy 
Tokes, whom he met and married in 2002. Their relationship is often 
described as a testament to love, mutual respect, and shared values. 
Together, they created a loving home for their two children, Kendall 
and McKenzie.
  Dr. Stokes also took immense pride in being a grandfather and greatly 
cherished the memories with his loved ones.
  Today, I ask that we all take a moment to remember Dr. Stokes legacy 
of knowledge, kindness, and compassion.
I rise today to honor the life and service 
of Judge Edmundo B. Garcia, Jr., a devoted husband, father, public 
servant, and community leader from San Diego, Texas.
  Born in 1936, Judge Garcia dedicated his life to education and public 
service. For 32 years, he served the San Diego Independent School 
District as a teacher and administrator, shaping the lives of countless 
students.
  He later went on to serve as Duval County Judge from 1995 until his 
retirement in 2006, and again as Interim Judge in 2022, earning the 
respect and trust of his community.
  Beyond public office, Judge Garcia was a proud U.S. Army veteran, a 
4th Degree Knight of Columbus, and an active member of the San Diego 
Rotary Club and the Sociedad Catolica Mutualista. His civic leadership 
extended to board service, including the First State Bank of San Diego, 
and he will be fondly remembered as ``the voice of the San Diego 
Fighting Vaqueros.
  Judge Garcias legacy is rooted in faith, family, and service. He is 
survived by his wife of 60 years, Rosa Maria, his children, 
grandchildren, great-granddaughter, and a grateful community.
, Judge Garcia lived a life defined by devotion to God, 
family, and the people of Duval County. Let us be inspired by his 
legacy.
I rise today to honor the life 
and legacy of Tom Cousins.
  Tom Cousins was one of the most influential figures in Georgias 
history, transforming Atlanta into one of the Nations leading cities.
  At just 16, he enrolled at the University of Georgia, earning a 
degree in finance and graduating in the top ten percent of his class.
  After graduation, he served in the United States Air Force, rising to 
the rank of First Lieutenant.
  Following his service, he founded a real estate company with his 
father, becoming the largest homebuilder in Georgia.
  Tom later purchased key properties in downtown Atlanta and was 
instrumental in relocating the St. Louis Hawks to the city.
  Beyond business, he led the East Lake revitalization project, turning 
the neighborhood into a thriving urban community.
  His vision and leadership left an enduring mark on Georgia and its 
capital.
  Today, we remember Tom Cousins for his extraordinary contributions.
I rise today to honor Wynnton Hill Baptist 
Church. The Church celebrated its 164th Anniversary on August 24, 2025, 
with a service at the church located at 2620 Buena Vista Road in 
Columbus, Georgia.
  Wynnton Hill Baptist Church, established in 1861, proudly stands as 
the first church of any denomination in the Wynnton area of Columbus, 
Georgia and the second oldest predominantly African American Church in 
the Muscogee/Chattahoochee Valley Area. Driven by a deep yearning to 
create a fellowship for the glory of God through Jesus Christ, a small 
group of dedicated believers came together under the guidance of 
Reverend Phillip Owens. They gathered at the home of Mr. and Mrs. 
Willie and Sarah James to lay the foundation of this spiritual 
community.
  Reverend Owens, who became the first pastor, led the church during 
its formative years. The congregation demonstrated exceptional 
commitment by building a bush arbor on land that the church purchased 
from the James family, using fresh bushes from nearby woodlands for 
their Saturday gatherings. The church quickly grew, with many souls 
coming to faith.
  The churchs first wooden structure served as a worship center, and 
under Pastor Owens--who served an astounding 47 years--the church 
flourished. Wynnton Hill has become a testament to the mercy and grace 
of Jesus Christ, having faced various trials yet overcoming them 
through faith.
  Throughout its 164 years, Wynnton Hill has maintained a legacy of 
resilience, even amidst challenges and disagreements. The church has 
birthed three other assemblies--Greater Peace, New Mt. Zion, and 
Blessed Assurance Baptist Churches--emphasizing the unifying power of 
the gospel.
  Wynnton Hill has been shepherded by numerous dedicated pastors, with 
Reverend Owens as the longest serving, followed by several other 
esteemed leaders to include Samuel Daniels, R.T. Lewis, H.H. Hunter, 
Dr. James H. Carter, Dr. Van J. Malone, F.L. Williams, Dr. R.C. Gates, 
Robert L. Evans, Dr. Bruce Alford, and Dr. Kenneth Cyrus, who all 
contributed to the churchs growth and community involvement. Several 
Pastors led the church during periods of transition as Interim Pastors 
to include Reverend Joe Sales, Reverend Tommy Holston, and Dr. Charles 
McAfee.
  Over the years, many sons and daughters of the House of Wynnton have 
been licensed to preach the gospel and have gone on to have significant 
impacts in communities across the Chattahoochee Valley Area and beyond 
to include Oliver Holston, Tommy Holston, Robert Holston, Robert Evans, 
Evoucous Thomas, Charles Milton, Isaac Whitfield, Paul Milton, Lewis 
McCants, James Love, David Holston, Michael David, Carlton Dawson, 
Artie Johnson, Charlene Dawson, Doris Wade, Eulas Wade and Roy Evans.
  Significant milestones include the construction of the first brick 
building in 1930 that would later house the first public school for 
African Americans in the basement. The first Education wing was built 
in 1951. During this time, the Church became a leader in the community 
in advocating for civil rights and social justice. In 1989, the 
educational wing was firebombed and destroyed. But the Lord blessed the 
church to be able to rebuild and dedicate a new wing in 1990. In the 
same year, the Lord Blessed the Church with a new sanctuary. The old 
sanctuary was dedicated as a fellowship hall and named after Pastor 
J.H. Carter.
  In more recent years, under the leadership of Pastor Michael W. 
Sherman, who has served as Pastor since 2015, the church has embraced 
technology for worship and has actively engaged in community outreach, 
including Thanksgiving dinners, Christmas toy drives, and educational 
initiatives. Pastor Sherman with support of his congregation and 
supportive First Lady, Alma Taylor Sherman, understands that the 
ministry of Jesus Christ must be expanded beyond the church walls.
  Wynnton Hill Baptist Church remains committed to its mission; to 
evangelize, educate, and edify in the light of Jesus Christ. As the 
church continues to shine as a beacon of hope, it looks forward to 
fulfilling the Great Commission and changing lives both now and in 
future generations.
, I ask my colleagues to join me, along with my wife, 
Vivian and the more 765,000 people of the 2nd Congressional District in 
honoring Wynnton Hill Baptist Church on its 164th Church Anniversary.
  May the blessings of the Lord be upon Wynnton Hill Baptist Church as 
it continues this sacred journey to bring souls to our Lord and Savior 
Jesus Christ.
today, I introduce the District of Columbia 
Police Home Rule Act, which would repeal section 740 of the District of 
Columbia Home Rule Act (HRA). Section 740 allows the president, in the 
case of an emergency, to direct the D.C. mayor to provide the president 
the services of D.C.s police department, the Metropolitan Police 
Department (MPD), for federal purposes. Senator Chris Van Hollen is the 
sponsor of this bill in the Senate.
  Under the HRA, ``whenever the President . . . determines that special 
conditions of an emergency nature exist which require the use of the 
MPD for Federal purposes, he may direct the Mayor to provide him, and 
the Mayor shall provide, such services of the MPD as the President may 
deem necessary and appropriate for 30 days, unless Congress 
terminates or extends the emergency declaration.
  On August 11, 2025, President Trump declared a crime emergency in 
D.C. pursuant to section 740, even though violent crime reached a more 
than 30-year low in D.C. in 2024 and is down 27 percent this year 
compared to the same period last year. President Trump is the first 
president to invoke section 740, but his invocation is unlawful. While 
one crime is too many, there is no emergency or federal purpose that 
allowed President Trump to invoke section 740.
  Section 740 is inconsistent with the main purpose of the HRA, which 
is to ``grant to the inhabitants of the District of Columbia powers of 
local self-government. Giving the president the power to direct the 
services of MPD is a violation of D.C. home rule. MPDs first 
responsibility is to protect D.C. residents and visitors, and it must 
always remain under the authority of the D.C. mayor, who knows D.C. 
better than the president, to accomplish its mission.
  Section 740 is also unnecessary. In the case of a true federal 
emergency in D.C., the president can deploy federal law enforcement 
officers and the Armed Forces, and can request the support of MPD, as 
the Capitol Police did during the attack on the U.S. Capitol on January 
6, 2021, and as the Federal government does on a regular basis.
  At my request, the Houses fiscal year 2022 and 2023 D.C. 
appropriations bills blocked the president from carrying out section 
740.
  I urge my colleagues to support this bill.
I rise today in support of the PARTNER Act, 
introduced by Congressman Castro of Texas, and cosponsored by myself 
and seven of our colleagues who

are particularly invested in advancing our countrys relationships with 
crucial international organizations.
  This bill extends diplomatic privileges and immunities to five 
multilateral organizations. I am grateful that Congressman Castro 
included a section from my Pacific Partnership Act, which extends 
diplomatic privileges and immunities to the Pacific Islands Forum 
(PIF), the regions premier multilateral organization with eighteen 
members across Oceania, in the hopes that the PIF will establish a 
mission to the U.S.
  Scattered across the three traditional Pacific subregions of 
Melanesia, Micronesia and Polynesia are over two dozen jurisdictions 
collectively known as the Pacific Islands, including twelve independent 
states, countries in free association and territories. Though small in 
land area and population, the land plus maritime exclusive economic 
zones of all these jurisdictions combined exceed the land areas of 
China and Russia combined, comprising a significant part of the vast 
Pacific Ocean and our Earths surface.
  The Pacific Islands region remains critical to our national security 
interests in the Indo-Pacific and advises greater U.S. engagement to 
advance our shared interests and values, particularly in the context of 
growing geopolitical competition and threats by our shared adversaries 
to endanger the pursuit of a free and open Indo-Pacific.
  I urge my colleagues to join me in supporting this legislation to 
sustain and expand U.S. engagement in this critical region.
I rise today to extend a warm welcome 
to His All-Holiness Bartholomew, the Ecumenical Patriarch of 
Constantinople and spiritual leader of Orthodox Christianity. 
Recognized as ``First Among Equals among Orthodox bishops, he is 
visiting our Nations Capital to receive the Templeton Prize--the 
worlds most prestigious award honoring contributions to religion and 
science.
  As Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople, His All-Holiness leads the 
worlds second-largest Christian church. Since assuming this role in 
1991, he has earned global respect for his spiritual leadership and 
commitment to peace. Guided by his belief that ``war in the name of 
religion is war against religion, Patriarch Bartholomew has built 
strong relationships with religious and political leaders in every 
continent to promote unity among faiths.
  In 1997, Patriarch Bartholomew became the first Ecumenical Patriarch 
to visit the United States, and it is our great pleasure to welcome him 
back as he meets with the President, the Secretary of State, and 
Congress. I recognize and celebrate his lifelong dedication of 
peacemaking and his steadfast efforts to build bridges between East and 
West, Christian and Muslim, and all people of good will. May his 
presence here remind us of our commitment to remain ``One nation under 
God, indivisible, with liberty and justice for all.
  I extend my warmest welcome to His All-Holiness and pray that his 
visit will be blessed with success, fellowship, and hope for the future 
of our common humanity.