I rise today to recognize Patricia 
McArdle Ponticello, a remarkable constituent from my district. It is my 
honor to celebrate her on her 100th birthday--a day marking a hundred 
years of love, laughter, and commitment to her family, friends, and 
community.
  Born on September 23, 1925, in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. Patricia has 
experienced a full century of history, change, and milestones. Her life 
story stands not only as a testament to longevity, but also to 
stubbornness, grit, and an ability to outlast just about everyone.
  Patricia graduated from St. Marys High School in Haliswood, 
Pennsylvania, before perfecting her skills at Beautician School, where 
she went on to cut and style for the Mellon Family.
  She later served as a Guidance Counselor at the Gilmary Catholic 
School for Wayward Girls, which gave her the unique skills to manage 
her own sons, David, Bill, and Christopher.
  Later, she made her home and spent many years in Clinton, 
Pennsylvania after marrying her husband, William David Ponticello. 
William served in the U.S. Navy, WWII, from 1942 to 1994 on an LST at 
the Normandy Invasion and later went on to work as a design engineer.
  Her endless love and support filled the household with joy, laughter, 
and just enough discipline to keep everyone in line.
  In 2003, Patricia moved to Bucks County to help her son raise his 
three boys. Beyond her dedication to her family, Patricia remained 
steadfast in her commitment to her faith. Patricia is a devout Catholic 
and is a member of Our Lady of the Sacred Heart Catholic Church in 
Hilltown, Pennsylvania. Her Catholic faith has served as a guiding 
light in her life--shaping her values and offering strength and clarity 
through lifes many trials and triumphs.
  Today, at 100 years old, Patricia enjoys family, strolls around her 
Dublin, Pennsylvania property and continuing her legendary reputation 
as ``The Hawk. She loves an ice-cold beer, a strong margarita, and 
the occasional cigarette--because apparently thats the real secret to 
a long life.
  Her idea of the perfect birthday? A pig roast surrounded by family 
and friends.
, I ask my esteemed colleagues in the United States House 
of Representatives to please join me in raising a glass--preferably a 
cold one--and extending our heartfelt congratulations, sincere well-
wishes, and all of Gods blessings to Patricia Ponticello on the 
celebration of her 100th birthday.
I rise today to commemorate the 
final flight of the Bravo Company, 7-158th Chinook Helicopter General 
Support Aviation Battalion based out of the New Century AirCenter on 
September 7, 2025. As a result of the Army Transformation Initiative, 
the unit was officially deactivated on September 15, 2025.
  Based at New Century Airport for more than 40 years, this unit has 
become a staple in Gardner, Kansas and the surrounding community. From 
the familiar sight of the Chinooks flying over Gardner, to the 
generations of families brought to our community through their service 
at New Century, the unit leaves behind decades of memories.
  I am deeply grateful to the soldiers and their families who were a 
part of this unit, especially those service members who paid the 
ultimate sacrifice. Our nation and communities are better and safer 
because of their service.
  Furthermore, I want to express my strong support for the current 
service members who are facing uncertainty in the aftermath of the 
units deactivation. I urge Army leadership to keep these dedicated 
service members in mind as they continue with the Army Transformation 
Initiative. After all our service members and veterans have done for 
us, we must have their backs.
I rise to pay tribute to Ecumenical 
Patriarch Bartholomew on his receipt of the Templeton Prize this 
September.
  The Templeton Prize has been awarded to other prominent philanthropic 
figures including Jane Goodall, Desmond Tutu, and Mother Theresa. 
Established in 1972, the Prize was created by Sir John Templeton to 
recognize prominent spiritual discoveries and insights. 55 Laureates 
from all major faiths and numerous countries have received this 
prestigious award. Recipients of this prize have gone on to win the 
Nobel Peace Prize, with one even becoming a canonized saint.
  As the leader of the Eastern Orthodox church, Ecumenical Patriarch 
has been working to achieve religious and ecological equality since he 
was elected in 1991. From holding interfaith seminars after 9/11, to 
cosponsoring international peace conferences, his leadership has 
exemplified humility and the inclusion of people from all backgrounds. 
His Holiness has also focused on climate issues and protecting our 
environment. As Ecumenical Patriarch, he organized symposiums with 
world-renowned scientists and was able to secure grants to combat the 
destruction of Europes marine areas--efforts that landed him the title 
of the Green Patriarch.
  Before becoming Ecumenical Patriarch, Demetrios Arhondonis was born 
in Turkey and received his elementary and secondary education in 
Istanbul. He completed his undergraduate studies at the Theological 
School of Halki in 1972, before completing graduate studies at three 
different universities in Europe. He also obtained a doctorate from the 
University of Athens. After being ordained to the Diaconate and, years 
later, to the Priesthood, he became Assistant Dean at the Theological 
School of Halki before being appointed as the Personal Secretary to the 
late Ecumenical Patriarch Demetrios. These educational milestones were 
enhanced as he has been awarded over 10 honorary doctorates from 
globally recognized universities.
  It should come as no surprise that after 36 years of leading the 
Eastern Orthodox church, Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew is receiving 
this award. It is with great respect that I honor his Holiness and his 
tireless efforts for equality and peace.
on behalf of myself and Congressman Kevin 
Mullin, I rise today to honor the life of Richard ``Dick Keigwin, a 
loving father and an employee of Nabisco and Kraft Food for 35 years. 
Richard was born on May 8, 1944, and passed away on September 5, 2025, 
at the age of 81. It is my honor to recognize a man who spent his life 
uplifting young people and caring for his family.
  Richard served his Marlborough, Massachusetts community in a 
multitude of ways. He coached Marlborough Little League, Northborough 
Little League, Boys Club Basketball, and CYO Basketball. His devotion 
to coaching and mentoring earned him the title of ``Father of the 
Year by the Marlborough Boys Club. He was also awarded Man and Boy of 
the Year 1987.
  Richard was adored by his family. He and his wife Cheryl Keigwin were 
married for 59 years. He is survived by Cheryl and his sons, Richard 
Keigwin, Jr., Bryan Keigwin, and Adam Keigwin, along with grandchildren 
and great grandchildren. Richard loved spending time with his family 
and especially enjoyed watching History Channel and National 
Geographic.
  Adam and the Keigwin family are lifelong friends, and it is an honor 
to recognize Richard and his contributions to his community.
I was unavailable, and I missed the 
following Roll Call votes. Had I been present, I would have voted YEA 
on Roll Call No. 277; YEA on Roll Call No. 278; and YEA on Roll Call 
No. 279.
I rise today to recognize the 125th 
anniversary of Arvada High School.
  For more than a century, Arvada High School has been a central part 
of the community, empowering students with the tools they need to 
succeed in their future education. When the school first opened in 
1899, only seven students were enrolled. Today, Arvada High has over 
700 students enrolled and is now a leading institution for families in 
Jefferson County. Through its 125-year history, the school has adapted 
to meet the changing needs of its students through initiatives like the 
Empowerment Academy, which provides specialized support to students who 
require additional resources and increases equitable access to 
education.
  The schools dedicated teachers and staff have guided generations of 
students and made Arvada High a cornerstone for community development 
in Jefferson County.
  On behalf of the people of Colorados 7th Congressional District, it 
is my honor to congratulate Arvada High School on its 125th anniversary 
and for its dedication to students in our community.
I rise today to recognize Foothills 
Regional Housing (FRH), who is celebrating their 50th anniversary of 
serving as the public housing authority for Jefferson County, Colorado.
  First created in the fall of 1975, Foothills Regional Housing has 
worked to meet the growing housing needs of Jefferson County by 
preserving existing affordable housing units and developing new ones. 
In addition to supporting low-income renters by administering over 
1,800 vouchers through the Department of Housing and Urban Development, 
FRH also supports low-income homeowners through their Emergency Home 
Repair Program.
  Under the leadership of Executive Director Lori Rosendahl, FRH has 
built award-winning new developments like the Ives in Wheat Ridge and 
the AVi at Olde Town in Arvada, which have been recognized for their 
thoughtful design and emphasis on supporting residents. I look forward 
to seeing what the next 50 years will bring for FRH as they continue to 
provide critical housing resources for our community.
  On behalf of the people of Colorados 7th Congressional District, it 
is my honor to congratulate Foothills Regional Housing on their 50th 
anniversary and thank them for all they do for our community.
I rise today in honor of Hispanic American 
Heritage Month to recognize an extraordinary artist, educator, and 
community leader from Rochester, New York, Jason Barber.
  As a Cuban-American artist and educator, Jason Barber has devoted his 
creative journey to exploring the intersection of memory and place, 
weaving together Rochesters histories with the lived experiences of 
its people. His work reflects on how communities preserve memory, 
identity, and family history, often drawing inspiration from our citys 
legacy as the birthplace of modern photography through Kodak Park.
  Beyond his artistic practice, Jason manages the International Plaza, 
a vibrant cultural and economic hub that celebrates the diversity of 
Rochester, New York. Under his leadership, the Plaza has grown into a 
welcoming space where small businesses, artists, and community members 
share food and traditions from around the world. His guidance has 
uplifted local entrepreneurs while fostering stronger connections 
across the region.
  Jasons heritage and perspective deeply inform his approach to both 
art and education. With more than a decade of experience in the arts 
and nonprofit sectors, he has worked tirelessly to bridge culture and 
community. His career includes leadership roles as a Creative 
Consultant and Gallery Director with organizations such as the 
Rochester Brainery, Oxford Gallery, Memorial Art Gallery, and The Yards 
Art Collective. Through these roles, Jason has fostered collaborations 
across disciplines, enriching Rochesters cultural fabric and ensuring 
that creativity remains a force for connection and inclusion.
  It is with great pride and admiration that I recognize Jason Barber 
this Hispanic American Heritage Month. His advocacy continues to uplift 
and enrich our community, leaving a lasting impact for generations to 
come.
I rise today in honor of Hispanic American 
Heritage Month to recognize an outstanding leader from Rochester, New 
York, Lucia Colindres.
  Originally from El Salvador, Lucia Colindres came to the United 
States in 1989, bringing with her a spirit of resilience and service 
that has defined her lifes work. Since that time, she has established 
herself as a beacon of light in Rochester, devoting her career to 
championing equity and addressing the most pressing needs of the Latino 
community.
  As Chief Program Officer of the Ibero-American Action League, Lucia 
leads with vision and determination, overseeing vital health 
initiatives that strengthen families across the region by addressing 
social determinants such as access to care, nutrition, and housing. 
Previously, in senior leadership at Rochester Regional Health, she 
spearheaded innovative pro-Medicaid programs that prioritized 
prevention and compassion by tackling the root causes of health crises. 
Through her leadership, Lucia has ensured that Latino families in 
Rochester are not only supported in times of need but also empowered to 
build healthier and more fulfilling lives.
  Lucias influence extends beyond institutions into the broader 
community. As a founding member of the Community Health Workers 
Association of Rochester, she has worked tirelessly to advance and 
professionalize a workforce that is indispensable to the well-being of 
families. Through every role she has held, Lucia Colindres has 
exemplified what it means to lead with both vision and heart by 
strengthening Rochester, uplifting families, and building a legacy of 
service that will endure for generations.
  It is an honor to recognize Lucia Colindres during Hispanic American 
Heritage Month. Her leadership has strengthened our community, advanced 
equity, and created opportunities that will endure for generations.
I rise today to recognize and commend 
Michele Manatt for her service at The George Washington University 
Graduate School of Political Management (GSPM), where she has served on 
the board since 2021, and for her contributions to our Nation.
  A native Washingtonian, Ms. Manatt graduated from the University of 
California, Berkeley, where she studied political economy. After 
graduation, she returned to the District of Columbia to begin her 
career in public policy and international affairs.
a professional staff member on the House 
Committee on Foreign Affairs, where her portfolio included oversight of 
the United States relationships with Canada and Mexico and countries 
throughout Central and South America. She went on to serve as Senior 
Policy Advisor to three consecutive Assistant Secretaries of State for 
Western Hemisphere Affairs at the U.S. Department of State, helping to 
manage policy in the region. She continued her public service as 
Director of Legislative Affairs at the White House Office of National 
Drug Control Policy.
  Since 2006, Ms. Manatt has worked as an independent consultant, 
providing strategic insight into hemispheric policy and social 
integration. She contributed to a multiyear initiative with the 
Americas Society/Council of the Americas to document and explore 
successful models of Hispanic integration in midsized American cities.
a leader in public diplomacy. She currently 
serves on the board of the Diplomacy Center Foundation, the private 
partner supporting the completion of the National Museum of American 
Diplomacy at the U.S. Department of States headquarters campus. She 
was the founding chair of the Council on Womens Leadership at the 
Meridian International Center, fostering dialogue and leadership 
development for women in support of Track II diplomacy. She has always 
been fascinated by the power of fashion. She says diplomats defend U.S. 
interests not in uniforms, but in suits, blouses, ties and, in her 
case, scarves.
  As a member of the GSPM board, Ms. Manatt has provided strategic 
counsel to ensure that students benefited from a strong, bipartisan 
academic environment and were exposed to diverse career paths. Through 
her familys philanthropy, she has also supported other parts of The 
George Washington University, including the law school, the Graduate 
School of Education and Human Development, the Elliott School of 
International Affairs and the Textile Museum.
, as Ms. Manatt concludes her service on the GSPM board, I 
ask my colleagues to join me in thanking her for her contributions to 
The George Washington University and to our Nation.
I rise today to recognize the tragic 
shooting at Evergreen High School in Evergreen, Colorado, that occurred 
on September 10, 2025.
  This senseless act of violence has left students, educators, and the 
greater Evergreen community in shock and grief. Two victims were 
hospitalized, and countless others are coping with the trauma of that 
day.
  The courage of first responders, educators, staff, and community 
members helped prevent further harm and demonstrated the strength of 
our community in the face of crisis. Students and faculty at the school 
promptly followed safety protocols that saved lives, and a nearby 
recreation center employee sheltered more than 70 students until the 
danger had passed. The vigilance and quick action of community members 
inside and outside the school helped ensure the safety of students and 
staff.
  The Jefferson County Sheriff, Reggie Marinelli, and the entire Police 
Department quickly responded with extraordinary service, arriving in 
under two minutes. That swift response saved lives and provided 
reassurance to the Evergreen community in its greatest moment of need.
  In the aftermath of the incident, the Evergreen Parent Teacher 
Student Association (PTSA) mobilized to provide on-the-ground support 
for the community, including mental health resources, warm meals, and 
safe spaces. These community volunteers--in addition to many other 
supportive groups and organizations--have played a critical role in 
connecting families with needed services and ensuring the entire 
community has everything they need to re-enter their school.
  Like far too many communities across Colorado and the Nation, this is 
not the first time the Evergreen community has been touched by gun 
violence. Yet, in the aftermath of this tragedy, Evergreen has 
demonstrated extraordinary resilience, uniting in support of one 
another as the process of healing begins.
  On behalf of the people of Colorados 7th Congressional District, I 
stand with the Evergreen community, offer my condolences to the victims 
and their families, and reaffirm my commitment to ensuring every child 
can go to school without fear for their safety.
I rise today with deep respect and 
admiration to recognize the remarkable service of Radioman Petty 
Officer 3rd Class Natale ``Nate Scarpelli, a proud veteran of the 
United States Navy and our distinguished Veteran of the Month for 
October 2025 from Michigans 9th Congressional District. His courage, 
dedication, and sacrifice during World War II reflect the very best of 
the American spirit.
  Radioman Scarpelli answered his countrys call to service in 1942. He 
enlisted in the United States Navy and was assigned as a Radioman Petty 
Officer 3rd Class aboard the USS Moreno (AT-87). He joined his ship in 
North Africa, becoming the youngest member of a seasoned crew.
  The USS Moreno played a critical role in the war effort, carrying out 
dangerous missions that included firefighting, towing disabled 
warships, deploying depth charges, underwater welding, and escort 
operations. Radioman Scarpellis skill as a radioman, communicating 
through Morse code and signal lamp, kept the crew connected during 
critical engagements. He also served as the ships marksman, helping 
set sights on its 5-inch cannon, 40mm guns, and long-range weapons.
  Radioman Scarpellis service brought him to the frontlines of some of 
the wars most pivotal campaigns. The USS Moreno supported the Allied 
invasion of Sicily, clearing the coastline for advancing Army units. 
Later, it provided support during the Invasion of Southern France. 
During combat, Radioman Scarpelli was wounded by land artillery and 
treated at a field hospital before rejoining his ship, where he 
continued his duties, including cutting mine cables and neutralizing 
deadly sea mines.
  In one remarkable mission, the USS Moreno captured a German one-man 
submarine armed with a torpedo. The vessel was brought aboard for 
inspection, drawing the attention of senior military leadership eager 
to study its design.

  Radioman Scarpelli also served alongside his three brothers: Frank, 
who fought in the Pacific with the Army; John, who took part in the 
invasion of Northern France; and Augie, who manned guns on a Navy 
merchant ship in the Pacific. Their shared service reflects the 
extraordinary sense of duty and sacrifice that defined their 
generation.
  After the war, which he served through 1945, Radioman Scarpelli 
returned home to Michigan. He completed a tool and die apprenticeship, 
earned a Bachelors Degree in Mechanical Engineering, and began a 
distinguished career at Ford Motor Company in Manufacturing 
Engineering. There, he developed an innovative single-piece rear 
differential system that was later acquired by MIT. He married in 1953, 
retired at age 55, and spent the decades that followed traveling the 
world, remaining dedicated to his family, faith, and community.
, Nate Scarpellis life is a testament to service and 
resilience. Whether on the deck of the USS Moreno or in the engineering 
halls of Ford Motor Company, his contributions strengthened both our 
Nations security and its industry. It is my distinct honor to 
recognize him as our Veteran of the Month for October 2025.