I rise today to celebrate the life of one of 
my favorite Republicans, my former colleague, my friend, the late 
Hawaii State Senator, Sam Slom.
  For 20 years, Sam represented East Honolulus 9th Senatorial 
District. and for almost half that time, he was the sole Republican 
member of the Hawaii Senate earning him the self-imposed nickname. 
``The Lone Ranger.
  As one of a handful. or the only, member of the minority party, Sam 
read every bill, every resolution, and defied time and space to try and 
get to every committee and vote.
  I had the honor and privilege of serving many years side by side Sam. 
Yes. we disagreed on many things, but more than not, we saw eye to eye, 
especially on our commitment to lowering the cost of living for middle 
class working families and being good fiscal stewards with taxpayer 
dollars.
  Prior to his service in the State Senate. Sam served as the chief 
economist for the Bank of Hawaii, and for over 30 years he was the 
President and Executive Director of Small Business Hawaii.
  There is much that could be said about the boy from Allentown, 
Pennsylvania, who found his way to Hawaii in the sixties and made 
Hawaii his home.
  What I can personally share is that he was often the member I could 
count on to be there. When I needed his vote, even if he disagreed, 
hed help me get it to the floor and was open and honest with me on why 
he disagreed.
  He was a statesman till the very end, and given the partisan times we 
find ourselves in, I truly miss my friend.
  Mahalo to Sam for blessing us with his wisdom, his advocacy. and his 
friendship. There are more Hawaiian hoary bats in our islands because 
of him and we will forever remember him as the lone ranger who 
challenged our minds and won our hearts.
I rise today to honor Mary Ann Riley of 
Inman, South Carolina for her decades of service to our community and 
dedication to the South Carolina Republican Party.
1982. That same year, Mrs. 
Riley began attending community meetings, getting involved in local 
campaigns, and was appointed President of the Spartanburg County 
Republican Women, where she has served ever since.
  More than politics, Mrs. Riley is a major contributor to her local 
pregnancy center, she has volunteered her time with the mental health 
divisions, the foster care community, and supports Upstate veterans 
undergoing hospice care. She is also active in her church and other 
organizations that work to assist our fellow South Carolinians every 
single day.
  She has served the South Carolina GOP in many roles and has attended 
local, state, and national meetings and conventions. She is the 
recipient of numerous awards including the ``Woman of Achievement 
Award from the South Carolina Legislative Republican Women Caucus, 
``Woman of the Year from Spartanburg County Republican Women and has 
received the honor of ``Catholic Woman of the Year twice.
  A former teacher, her lifes work has been to make the world a better 
place for her students, her neighbors, and future generations.
a true public servant who has made a significant and 
lasting impact on Spartanburg County, the South Carolina GOP, and the 
lives of countless South Carolinians. We will never be able to fully 
thank her for over 30 years of service to the people of Spartanburg 
County and the Upstate as a whole. She has left an indelible mark on 
the Palmetto State.
  I thank Mary Ann Riley for her years of service and friendship. May 
God continue to bless her.
St. Louis and I rise to celebrate and honor 
-Peebles for her career in public service to Missouris 
First District over the last 30 years. Throughout her career, she has 
been an inspiration to many. Evelyn was the first Black woman appointed 
as a Commissioner in the City of St. Louis. She has served under 
several Mayors, most recently as the Commissioner of Recreation for the 
City of St. Louis, ensuring that all St. Louisans have an opportunity 
to enjoy recreational activities such as swimming, aerobics, basketball 
and more.
  Her charitable contributions have ranged from providing science and 
conservation education at the Saint Louis Science Center and Missouri 
Department of Conservation, to promoting learning opportunities with 
the National Society of Black Engineers. She has further dedicated her 
time with BJC HealthCares School Outreach and Youth Development, St. 
Louis Transitional Hope House, and the Womens Society of Washington 
University.
  She is a proud mother who is passionate about her faith and is 
committed to making St. Louis a better place for all, especially our 
youth. Ms. Evelyn Rice-Peebles has received multiple awards including 
the Harambee Institute Youth Service Award, the Jodie Bailey and 
Friends Recreational and Sports Social Inc. Role Model Award, the Hope 
House Creative Support Award, and the Young Women Christian 
Associations 2016 Leader of Distinction Award. She is also an inductee 
of the St. Louis Boxing Hall of Fame and a recipient of a Resolution 
for Excellence in Office and Service by the St. Louis City Board of 
Aldermen.
  On behalf of Missouris First District and the St. Louis community, 
we thank Ms. Evelyn Rice-Peebles for everything she has done for our 
region. I personally wish her a joyous retirement filled with family, 
creative writing, spoken word, and the final publication of her 
collection of short stories.
I rise today to recognize and celebrate 
Richard Baron of Woodstock, Connecticut who retires from his work with 
the Woodstock Fire Marshals office on November 30, 2023. Richards 
retirement concludes 50 years of exemplary service to the Town of 
Woodstock, the last 27 of which were as Fire Marshal. His outstanding 
dedication to his community and expertise will be sorely missed.
  From his earliest days in northeastern Connecticut, Richard was 
destined to be an exceptional member of the Woodstock community. He 
attended the Woodstock Academy and Ellis Technical School in Woodstock 
and Danielson respectively and was drawn to helping others by following 
a special calling to the challenging work of public safety. At a very 
young age, Richard began his journey at the Muddy Brook Fire Department 
as a volunteer, which gave him a chance to apply his technical 
knowledge and caring disposition to the tasks of a firefighter.

  Richards professional career has also been defined by his service to 
the community--in the halls of Connecticuts state government, where he 
worked with the Connecticut Department of Transportation for over 31 
years. His talented work and leadership skills were rewarded over the 
years with a series of promotions. At the time of his retirement, he 
had risen to the position of Fleet Manager for the entire state of 
Connecticut, which is a huge responsibility, requiring tremendous 
logistical and organizational skills.
  In November of 1973, when Richard joined the Muddy Brook Fire 
Department, one of three volunteer departments serving Woodstock and 
the surrounding community, he started on the training squad. He has 
since remained a dutiful protector of his neighbors, serving 50 years 
in fire safety through many different capacities. He has always been 
guided by a principle to contribute wherever he felt he was needed by 
the town. Richard spent 45 of those years as an EMT. Given his 
diligence, Richard was promoted several times within the Muddy Brook 
Fire Department. His valuable contributions to the community were 
recognized and he achieved the rank of Captain by the early 1980s. 
During his time as Captain, Richard committed himself to advancing fire 
safety in Woodstock and took on the role of Deputy Fire Marshal for the 
town in 1984.
  In 1990, Richard was promoted to Deputy Chief of the Muddy Brook Fire 
Department. Only two years later he was promoted again to Chief of the 
Department, a position he would hold until 1995. It was not just his 
extensive experience and impressive ethic that prompted these 
promotions, but also his obvious leadership qualities. Richard has 
always been willing to share his abundance of knowledge by mentoring 
and recruiting new members of the fire department.
  Richard was appointed Fire Marshal by the Town of Woodstock in 1996, 
the position from which, after nearly another 30 years, he retires this 
month. Richard has been essential in presenting fire safety and 
prevention techniques. As Fire Marshal, he has been responsible for 
assisting all three Woodstock Fire Departments with fire suppression 
and hazardous materials activities. Richards impact has reached far 
beyond administering the basic duties of a Fire Marshal. He has used 
his plentiful experience to create poster contests for children, 
scholarships, and more to help publicize and educate the public on 
Woodstocks fire safety activities. During this time, Richard has also 
served as the Safety Officer for the Muddy Brook Fire Department, 
demonstrating how deeply he cares about protecting those within his 
community.
, it is an honor to represent such committed constituents 
like Richard Baron. Richard is an institution unto himself whose 
retirement leaves shoes that will not easily be filled. However, we can 
take solace in the knowledge that Richards legacy lives on in the 
countless firefighters he mentored and, despite his retirement, that he 
will remain close to the Woodstock firefighting community. Having 
positioned the town of Woodstock for greater success, Richard has 
earned this retirement and will appreciate time with his wife of 30 
years, Beth, and their family. Mr. Speaker, I ask that my colleagues in 
the House join me in recognizing Richard Barons community-oriented 
contributions to the town of Woodstock and congratulating him on his 
well-earned retirement.
I rise today to recognize and celebrate a 
remarkable milestone: the 100th Anniversary Celebration of The Kiwanis 
Club in Santa Ana.
  On October 20, 1920, a group of 77 leading citizens of Santa Ana 
organized the Kiwanis Club of Santa Ana as the seventh Kiwanis Club in 
California. The Club Charter was issued on February 23, 1921.
  In the 1920s and 1930s, the Club focused on supporting various 
youth and community organizations, including the YMCA and Boy Scouts of 
America. Members of the Club worked on the coordinating committees for 
the development of the current Santa Ana College Campus and the YMCA 
building on Sycamore Street, as well as helped to build the Masonic 
temple on that same road.
  In 1954, a focus on scholarships led to the Clubs first award to a 
Santa Ana High School student for $500. Due to the generosity of 
members, friends, and bequests, the Foundation scholarship fund has 
grown to over $1 million. Scholarships today are awarded to continuing 
and transferring Santa Ana College students. To date, the Club has 
awarded over $3.6 million in scholarships.
  Notably, Kiwanis International eliminated gender as a qualification 
of membership in 1987. The Kiwanis Club of Santa Ana welcomed its first 
female member shortly thereafter. Santa Ana Kiwanians Doy Henley and 
Cliff Benson took a stand and advocated for the inclusion of women at 
the International Convention in 1979.
  Since 2000, the club has focused on education and support for low-
income families and those with special needs. The Club has evolved with 
the needs of the community and has developed into a group of concerned, 
motivated men and women from diverse ethnic and vocational backgrounds.
  While many similar organizations within the Kiwanis Community and 
other similar organizations have disbanded, the Kiwanis Club of Santa 
Ana is still doing significant work in our community. I ask my 
colleagues to join me in celebrating this wonderful milestone of a 
century of community service.
I rise today to celebrate the 
life of James ``Jim Theodore Herfurth, who passed away peacefully in 
his home on November 1, 2023, in Osage Beach, Missouri.
  Jim was born on July 21, 1937, to parents Theodore and Mathilda 
Herfurth in Eldon, Missouri. He attended Eldon High School where he 
played forward for the Mustangs Basketball team. The team ultimately 
won the State Championship in 1954, and Jim graduated in 1955. He 
continued his education at the University of Missouri, graduating in 
1959 with a BS degree in banking and finance, and commissioning as a 
second lieutenant in the United States Army Artillery. He was stationed 
at Fort Sill, Oklahoma, where he served as a Finance Officer and as 
adjutant for the Target Artillery Department. His passion for his 
country led him to extend his original tour for an additional year due 
to the Berlin Crises.
  After leaving active duty, Jim began his finance career with IBM in 
Kansas City, Missouri. In 1964, he began his 35-year banking career 
with Central Trust Bank in Jefferson City, Missouri while 
simultaneously joining the 420th Civil Affairs National Guard Reserve 
Unit. During his career with the Central Bank organization, Jim rose 
through the operations and loans divisions, as well as the ranks of the 
Missouri National Guard, until Central Bancompanys acquisition of Bank 
of Lake of the Ozarks in 1987. Jim was then named President and CEO of 
the newly named Central Bank of Lake of the Ozarks, and he earned his 
rank of Colonel in the Missouri National Guard.
  Passionate about his community, Jim left a mark wherever he lived. 
His commitment to his community was evidenced through his involvement 
in the new construction of roads and bridges, economic development 
through Central Bank, public schools, YMCA, hospitals, and the Dogwood 
Animal Shelter. He had a strong sense of community and worked hard to 
make his home a better place for everyone.
  Although a busy man, Jim still found time to enjoy his hobbies. He 
loved to play golf, spending an equal amount of time playing as he did 
trying to convince his grandchildren to play. When he wasnt golfing, 
Jim was snow skiing, visiting Palm Springs, or visiting he and his 
wifes friends in Tucson, Arizona.
  Left to cherish his memory is his wife Marjorie M. Herfurth; his two 
children from his marriage in 1961 to Barbara A. Silvers: daughter, 
Kimberly Herfurth Ayscue of Franklinton, North Carolina; son, J. 
Matthew Herfurth and his wife Jeane Herfurth of Madison, Mississippi; 
his four grandchildren: Michael and Andrew Boyleir; daughter, Grace, of 
Monet, Missouri. He was preceded in death by his sister, Barbara 
Herfurth Moffitt.
  Jims life was one of service, grace, and love for his family and 
community. He will be deeply missed by all whom he encountered.
I was absent from votes on November 2, 
2023, due to illness. Had I been present, I would have voted in the 
following manner: NAY on Roll Call No. 592; NAY on Roll Call No. 591; 
NAY on Roll Call No. 590; NAY on Roll Call No. 589; NAY on Roll Call 
No. 588; NAY on Roll Call No. 587; NAY on Roll Call No. 586; NAY on 
Roll Call No. 585; NAY on Roll Call No. 584; NAY on Roll Call No. 583; 
NAY on Roll Call No. 582; NAY on Roll Call No. 581; NAY on Roll Call 
No. 580; and NAY on Roll Call No. 579.
I rise to congratulate Penelope ``Penny 
Gross on her retirement after 27 years of serving as the Fairfax County 
Mason District Supervisor and 21 years of chairing the Potomac 
Watershed Roundtable.
  Elected in 1995 to represent the Mason District, Penny has been an 
advocate for affordable housing, expanded public transportation, and 
violence prevention. Penny represents Fairfax County on the Board of 
Directors of the Metropolitan Washington Council of Governments, the 
Northern Virginia Regional Commission, the INOVA Health System Board of 
Trustees, and the Potomac Watershed Roundtable (PWR).
  Shortly after becoming the chair of PWR, she encouraged the VA 
Department of Conservation and Recreation (DCR) to help in developing 
strategies that will bring the state of Virginia up to the standard 
that Maryland had already set, regarding efforts that support the 
Chesapeake Bay Preservation Program. With that, in July 2003, the 
Potomac River Tributary Strategy was developed by DCR.
  In January 2004, Penny led the PWR in discussions for a 2004 vision, 
whose focal points influenced many water-related issues, such as 
Stormwater Management, Wastewater Treatment Plants, and Total Maximum 
Daily Load. In April later that year, Penny was appointed by then 
Governor Mark Warner to the Chesapeake Bay Blue Ribbon Funding Panel. A 
panel tasked with finding alternative sources for funding the 
Chesapeake Bay Cleanup. By October 2004, Chairman Gross announced some 
recommendations on behalf of the Chesapeake Bay Blue Bay Ribbon Finance 
Panel.
  On the state and national level, Penny is a past president of the 
Virginia Association of Counties, vice-chair of the National 
Association of Counties Energy, Environment, and Land Use Committee, 
and past president of the National Association of Regional Councils. 
She was first appointed by Governor Mark Warner to the Local Government 
Advisory Committee (LGAC) to the Chesapeake Executive Council, which 
she chaired from March 2006 until August 2008, and continues to serve.
  I had the great pleasure of serving with Penny during my 14 years on 
the Board, first representing the Providence District and then as 
Chairman. The work that she has done for Fairfax County is outstanding, 
and we will continue to honor her legacy as a public servant. Penny 
Grosss commitment to our community and the mission of local government 
is unparalleled. She leaves behind a legacy that will enrich our 
community for generations to come. Her career in public service is 
truly commendable and deserving of our heartfelt gratitude. All through 
her tenure as Chair of the PWR, she proved to be an exemplary leader, 
and continues to attract very influential and dedicated environmentally 
minded individuals to the roundtable.
, Penny Grosss commitment to public service is seen 
through her tireless work on behalf of the people of Fairfax County. 
Though she may be retiring, I suspect that she will continue to remain 
active in the causes that are important to her. I commend her for her 
service and ask my colleagues to join me in congratulating her on her 
retirement.
I rise today to recognize an outstanding 
group of men and women in Northern Virginia. These individuals have 
demonstrated superior dedication to public safety and have been awarded 
the prestigious Valor Award by the Central Fairfax Chamber of Commerce.
  This event honors the remarkable heroism and bravery in the line of 
duty exemplified by our public safety officers. Our public safety and 
law enforcement personnel put their lives on the line every day to keep 
our families and neighborhoods safe. This years ceremony will present 
awards to recognize extraordinary actions above and beyond the call of 
duty in a variety of categories including the Gold Citizen Award, 
Meritorious Award, the Certificate of Valor, Unit Citation, and Unit 
Citation: Silver Award of Valor.
  It is with great pride that I include in the Record the names of the 
following Valor Award Recipients:
  Silver Award of Valor: PFC Maurice Anderson, OFC Patrick Talbott, PFC 
Olivia Baratto, PFC Larry Luna.
  Bronze Award of Valor: Lt. Ben Smith, MPO Joe Pittman, PFC Ryan 
Foster, PFC Sam Dee, PFC Marissa Fettig, PFC Noelle Becker, OFC Mathias 
MacFarlane, Dispatch Supervisor Cynthia Tetterton.
  Certificate of Valor: Captain Steven Burmeister.
  Gold Citizen Award: Mr. Ahmed Alsraai.
  Meritorious Award: Sgt. James Lewis, MPO Charles Mills.
, I congratulate the 2023 Fairfaxs Finest Valor Awards 
Recipients, and thank all of the men and women who keep our community 
safe. Their efforts, made on behalf of the citizens of our community, 
are selfless acts of heroism and truly merit our highest praise. I ask 
my colleagues to join me in applauding this group of remarkable 
citizens.
I rise to recognize the 50th Anniversary 
of the Fairfax County, Virginia Tree Commission.
  The Fairfax County Board of Supervisors chartered the Tree Commission 
as a board of public members in August 1973, and in 1976 it was 
expanded and incorporated into the county code to advise the Board on 
implementing the newly enacted Tree Planting and Preservation 
Ordinance. The Tree Commissions has operated for 50 years in service 
to the health and well-being of the countys urban forest, which in 
turn affects the health and well-being of all county residents.
  In 2005, as then Chairman of the Fairfax County Board of Supervisors, 
I recognized that the countys population had grown exponentially and 
so had the stressors on our tree canopy. I appeared before the Tree 
Commission and asked it to develop a Tree Action Plan the county could 
use to manage and enhance the countys forests and trees. That Plan was 
adopted by the Board in 2006.
  In 2008 the county successfully sought new Virginia state legislation 
to better protect trees, which led to the county enacting the Tree 
Conservation Ordinance (Chapter 122). It requires a minimum percentage 
of tree canopy to be preserved or replanted during the development 
process and established within 10 years.
  The Tree Commission worked to update the Tree Action Plan, which the 
Board adopted in

2020. It includes a detailed description of the health and 
environmental benefits of trees, as well as a strategic management plan 
to protect, preserve and expand the countys urban forest. That plan 
continues to guide the Tree Commissions advice to the Board on 
policies and procedures affecting trees.
  The Tree Commission has long sponsored the Fairfax County Friends of 
Tree Awards, which are designed to inspire individuals, agencies, 
organizations, and developers to protect, maintain and expand the 
countys tree canopy with exceptional and innovative tree actions and 
tree education programs. The Tree Commission created and continues to 
update and distribute a public education pamphlet, Tree Basics, 
explaining how to select the right tree, for the right location, at the 
right time, and how to plant and care for trees so they will survive. 
It is one of the countys most widely distributed and popular 
information brochures. Members of the Tree Commission participate in 
county outreach events, in the Tree Community of Practice as authorized 
by the Tree Action Plan, in the Tree Preservation and Planting Fund, 
and in other tree-related activities as needed.
  The Tree Commission promotes the equity goals of the countys One 
Fairfax policy by supporting tree preservation and planning projects 
that will benefit historically underserved neighborhoods in Fairfax 
County. And the Tree Commission has supported programs such as the 
Communitywide Energy and Climate Action Plan, which seeks to expand the 
overall county tree canopy to 60 percent, with a minimum of 40 percent 
canopy coverage in every census block by 2030. Everyone deserves to 
benefit from living near trees.
  I am pleased to join the Fairfax County Board of Supervisors, which 
has recognized 2023 as the Tree Commissions 50th Anniversary year, a 
time to honor and celebrate all its members over the years who 
faithfully served to preserve, protect, and expand our urban forest for 
the benefit all county residents, both now and in the future. To honor 
the Tree Commissions stellar service, the Board has planted 50 trees 
next to the Fairfax County Government Center, where they will grow and 
flourish for the next 50 years and beyond.