today I want to recognize Helen Bandyke, 
Dearborn resident and one of Michigans Rosie the Riveters, as she 
celebrates her 103rd birthday.
  During World War II countless women like Ms. Bandyke from across the 
Nation and right here in Southeast Michigan took over jobs that had 
been previously performed by men and held our country down during 
extremely trying times. Ms. Bandyke proudly worked at Chryslers DeSoto 
Plant in Dearborn in 1942 while her husband served overseas. She was 
among those strong women who blazed the trail for women in the 
workforce. I am so proud of Ms. Bandyke and her incredible contribution 
to our Nations labor movement and our history.
  Please join me and the people of Dearborn and Michigans 12th 
District Strong as we honor Ms. Helen Bandyke and wish her the happiest 
of birthdays.
CONGRATULATING DIANE FITZPATRICK ON BEING NAMED BOYS &amp; GIRLS EXECUTIVE 
                            of new hampshire
I rise today in recognition of Diane 
Fitzpatrick, Chief Executive Officer of the Boys &amp; Girls Club of 
Manchester, for being named Executive of the Year by the Nations over 
1000 clubs. This award is determined by the Professional Association of 
Boys &amp; Girls Clubs and by Dianes peers throughout the country. As the 
Executive of the Year, Diane has been recognized for her significant 
impact on the Manchester community and the youth development profession 
at a local, regional, and national level.
  As CEO of the Boys &amp; Girls Club of Manchester, Diane works with 
staff, the board of trustees, and community members to serve children 
and families across the city. With over 30 years of experience in 
higher education, marketing, and business development, Diane has 
pursued a bold and innovative vision for the Boys &amp; Girls Club since 
she joined the organization in 2014. In this role, Diane oversees 
strategic planning, fundraising, community relations, and partnership 
development.
  She is widely regarded by staff as an indispensable leader and among 
the broader New Hampshire community as critical to the advancement of 
childrens issues. I commend Diane for winning this prestigious award 
and will continue to support her work to help youth reach their full 
potential.
  I look forward to seeing what Diane will accomplish for the 
Manchester community in the years to come, and I am confident she will 
continue to uplift kids and families in our district. On behalf of all 
the constituents of New Hampshires First Congressional District, I 
applaud Diane for her commendable leadership, and wish her success in 
future endeavors.
I rise today, along with the people of St. 
Louis, to pay tribute to the remarkable life and enduring legacy of 
Apostle Dr. Lee F. Rice, a dedicated servant of God whose impact 
extends far beyond the walls of Victory Christian Outreach Church. Dr. 
Rices commitment to spreading the Gospel and serving his community 
leaves an indelible mark on all who had the privilege of knowing him.
. He is survived by his loving family, including 
his adult children: Rhoda Rice, Sardius Rice, Pastor Daphne Rice-Bruce 
(spouse-Alex

Bruce), Minister Romney Rice-Dunn (spouse-Minister Fred Dunn), and 
Minister Bryttani Rice. His legacy also lives on through his many 
grandchildren, great-grandchildren, and countless other cherished 
family members and friends.
  The educational background of Dr. Rice and his beloved wife, the late 
Apostle Dr. Doris V. Rice, speaks volumes about their commitment to 
ministry and service. Both graduated from Rhema Bible Training College 
in Tulsa, Oklahoma and received Family Counseling Degrees from National 
Lewis College. Their dedication to theological education culminated in 
the attainment of Biblical Studies Doctorate Degrees from Pillsbury 
Bible College.
  For over 40 years, they served as shepherds of the house of Victory 
Christian Outreach Church, nurturing a membership that at one time 
exceeded 500 members. Their leadership extended to the broader 
community, where they organized years of outreach events serving 
families, children, and youth with food, clothing, childcare, family 
counseling, and utility assistance. In times of crises, their church 
provided a safe refuge for families in need.
  As Senior Pastors, Church Administrators, and Community Leaders, Dr. 
Lee F. Rice and Dr. Doris V. Rice dedicated themselves to partnering 
with local churches to share the Gospel and provide a safe place for 
worship. Their church became a cornerstone of the community, hosting 
annual events such as Octoberfest, Be A Blessing, and the Easter Egg 
Hunt. Their contributions were recognized by the University City School 
District, which lauded Victory Christian Outreach Church as an 
outstanding community contributor.
  Pastor Lee and Pastor Doris have also had a profound impact on my 
life. They were my personal pastors for many years as well as my 
employers, and their daughter Daphne, who now serves as the current 
pastor, has been my very close friend since we were teens. Their other 
daughters, Romney and Bryttani, are like sisters. I am proud to have 
had the privilege of working at their preschool for a decade, and where 
I grew to love the important and lifesaving role that childcare 
providers have in our community.
  In honoring the life of Apostle Dr. Lee Rice, we celebrate a man of 
faith, integrity, and compassion. His legacy of service and devotion to 
God will continue to inspire generations to come. May his memory be a 
blessing to all who knew and loved him and may his spirit of love and 
generosity continue to shine brightly in our community.
I rise to recognize the accomplishments of 
Hermelinda Sapien.
  Hermelinda dedicated 55 years to the Center for Employment Training, 
and for the past 25 years she has displayed her unwavering leadership 
as President and Executive Director.
  The Center for Employment Training (CET) is an economic and community 
development corporation. Their job training and placement programs 
teach marketable skills to people of all educational levels and 
backgrounds, supporting them through the process of job placement. With 
12 locations, including San Joses, CETs impact is monumental.
  Hermelindas work with CET began as an Administrative Assistant, and 
her commitment served her well as she moved up to Human Resources 
Director, Chief Administrative Officer, Deputy Director, and 
ultimately, President and CEO.
  CETs ability to work with our community and support the dignity of 
self-sufficiency is largely due to Hermelindas hard work. She 
dedicated her career to ensuring CETs financial stability and 
guaranteeing that the needs of students at CET were being met.
  Thousands of people have received the training and support they 
needed to find meaningful employment that supports them and their 
families. Hermelindas work and that of all the CET staff has changed 
lives and our community for the better. Hermelindas leadership has 
made a profound difference.
  Hermelinda will be retiring in June of this year, and it is with 
great pride and respect that I recognize her accomplishments.
  I share with CETs Board of Directors in their heartfelt farewell to 
Hermelinda Sapien, and we will always remember her impact on the Center 
for Employment Trainings success.
-BALART. Mr. Speaker, in honor of Womens History Month, I 
rise today to pay tribute to Miriam Urra, an exemplary leader whose 
dedication and tireless efforts have profoundly impacted Allapattah for 
decades. Born in Las Villas, Cuba, Miriams journey to Miami in 1961 
marked the beginning of a life dedicated to service and strengthening 
her community.
  After graduating from Miami Senior High, Miriam pursued higher 
education at Miami Dade Community College and Florida Memorial College, 
setting the stage for a career defined by compassion and commitment. 
Miriams professional journey began in the optical field before she and 
her husband, Orlando Urra, established their own business.

  A leader, paratrooper and Prisoner of War in the first battalion of 
the Cuban Democratic Revolutionary Front Bay of Pigs operation, Orlando 
Urra remains nothing short of a hero and a legend in the Cuban South 
Florida community. A beloved friend and personal source of inspiration 
as he was, it is a surprise to no one that his wife, Miriam, should 
have taken up his mantel with equal strength, vigor, and dedication
  In 1981, Miriams path took a pivotal turn as she embarked on a new 
role with the City of Miami, serving as a Counselor for the Entrant 
Assistance Program. Through her work, Miriam provided invaluable 
support to refugees, such as the Cuban Marielitos who sought refuge in 
our South Florida community, offering counseling, referrals, and 
guidance to ensure their successful integration into society.
  Miriams dedication to community development only grew stronger as 
she transitioned to the Department of Community Development, City of 
Miami, where she served as a Community Involvement Specialist. In this 
capacity, she tirelessly advocated for residents, disseminating 
information about vital city programs and services while championing 
citizen participation in policymaking processes.
  Following the passing of her beloved husband, Orlando, Miriam retired 
from the City of Miami and embraced a new chapter as the Executive 
Director of Allapattah Community Action. Under Miriams leadership, 
Allapattah Community Action has flourished, overseeing vital programs 
for the elderly and childcare while also championing affordable housing 
initiatives. Her visionary approach and unwavering dedication have 
transformed lives and uplifted communities.
  Miriams influence reaches well beyond her professional achievements. 
As a pillar of our community and a cherished friend, she embodies the 
essence of what makes Allapattah great. Serving as a true leader and 
mentor to countless individuals, myself included, its with great pride 
that I recognize her today.
  In recognition of her outstanding service and unfaltering dedication, 
I ask my colleagues to join me in expressing our deepest gratitude to 
Miriam Urra for her exemplary leadership, love, and commitment to South 
Florida.
-BALART. Mr. Speaker, in honor of Womens History Month, I 
rise today to recognize Silvia Diez, a community leader who has 
utilized her platform to amplify new voices and celebrate the strength 
and resilience of women in Southwest Florida.
  Silvia first began her career in 2000 in the communications and media 
industry in the United States after graduating from a prestigious 
university in her native country of Argentina. Throughout her career, 
Silvia has been a dynamic force in the media, overcoming a variety of 
challenges, and redefining industry standards. Silvia was the host of 
the first local Spanish-language television show ``Que Pasa SW 
Florida on the Comcast Network, and for 19 years, was the editor of 
the first leading Hispanic newspaper in Southwest Florida, Nuevos Ecos. 
Currently, Diez is the Journalist and Marketing Director of El 
Mensajero, the leading Spanish newspaper in Southwest Florida, and the 
host of the show Power Latino TV, a platform that highlights Hispanic 
businesses in Southwest Florida.
  Silvia is devoted to ensuring that every woman in both Collier and 
Lee counties has the opportunity to reach their full potential. This 
commitment has culminated in her current role as owner and CEO of 
``Mujeres Emprendedoras (``Women Entrepreneurs), a business 
initiative that brings together talented and resilient women seeking to 
own their own businesses. In 2022, her passion for empowering women and 
inspiring change was recognized by the Hispanic Chamber of Commerce of 
Southwest Florida, and she became a finalist in the ``Women of 
Distinction Awards.
  Aside from being a trailblazing Hispanic entrepreneur, Silvia is a 
proud mother whose son, Emiliano, is currently in the Marine Academy. 
As a mother, she keenly understands and has sought to meet the needs of 
the children in the surrounding community. Every year, Diez dedicates 
her time to organizing a ``3 Kings Day toy drive for the children of 
the Coalition of Immokalee Workers. Silvia continues to build a lasting 
legacy of generosity and love through her drive to serve. Her 
relentless desire to foster strong leaders and build thriving 
communities has contributed to numerous successes for residents in 
Southwest Florida and my district.
, as a true leader in her community, Silvia Diez has 
proven her unwavering commitment to expanding opportunities for those 
in our community through her leadership and acts of selfless service. 
Today, in honor of this outstanding individual who has dedicated her 
time and expertise to our Southwest Florida community, I thank Sylvia 
for her invaluable contributions and work in advancing the futures of 
thousands of Floridians.
I rise today to recognize and honor the 
unique contributions of one of my constituents, Betty Burke, who 
volunteers countless hours each week helping others. Betty Burke 
believes that one person can make a difference in this complicated 
world. Nearly 20 years ago as a Rotarian, Betty partnered with 
Farmworkers Self Help Inc. to establish a mentoring program for young 
daughters of migrant workers. The Rotary Program ended in 2020, but 
Betty continued the program. She invested time, resources, and money to 
make certain weekly gatherings at the Clubhouse would continue to 
broaden the girls horizons. The best estimate for the time she spent 
with them is a remarkable 5,400 hours.
  Betty was also a founding member of San Antonio Rotary Club, served 
as President for two terms, and Assistant Governor for one. She 
spearheaded Rotarys taking over the Rattlesnake Festival. Along with 
others, Betty started a Farmers Market, which created a wonderful 
sense of community. Additionally, she helped create St. Leos Pasco 
County Fair Community Booths, made a giant gingerbread house for the 
St. Leo/SLU Christmas Village, and continues to support St. Leo. Betty 
also works to help children in foster care establish a sense of 
belonging as they transition from placements and works with partners to 
make sure their primary needs are met.
  It is clear that Ms. Betty Burke has made a profoundly positive 
impact on our community, and I am grateful for her service.
I rise today to recognize Brendan Pardue 
for being named the Royal Gorge Chamber Alliances 2023 Distinguished 
Citizen.
  Brendan was raised in Canon City and has spent his life in Colorado. 
He attended Regis University and graduated with majors in history, 
philosophy, and religion and then went on to earn his masters degree 
in guidance and counseling from the University of Northern Colorado.
  In 2005, Brendan purchased the Gibson Mansion and spent years 
restoring the house and reviving a historic part of Canon City. Since 
completing the restoration, Brendan has offered free use of the house 
to nonprofit organizations for fundraisers and other events. He has 
also restored 12 other historic buildings in the area. Brendans 
readiness to assist his community is one of many reasons why he is a 
fitting recipient of the Royal Gorge Chamber Alliances recognition.
  On behalf of the people of Colorados 7th Congressional District, it 
is my honor to congratulate Brendan Pardue for earning this award and 
thank him for his long standing dedication to our community.
I rise today to honor Andrew Heger, who was 
recently sworn in as the Chief of the Chanhassen Fire Department.
  Andrew began his career as a firefighter in 2001 in his hometown of 
Victoria, and after 15 years of service to the department became the 
citys first full-time fire chief. But after more than two decades of 
service with the Victoria Fire Department, Chief Heger was ready for a 
new challenge.
  When he got the offer to serve as the Chief of the Chanhassen Fire 
Department, Andrew jumped at the opportunity. Chief Heger was 
officially sworn in as Chief earlier this month and will be leading a 
crew of 26 paid-on-call and 10 full-time firefighters.
  Being a firefighter isnt just a job, its a calling. Its about 
being there for people when they need help the most, whether its a 
fire, a medical emergency, or just lending a helping hand.
  For over two decades, Chief Heger has served communities in Carver 
County with dedication and bravery. Chanhassen is fortunate to have 
such a qualified and experienced leader at the helm of its fire 
department. I have every confidence that Chief Heger will continue to 
build upon the departments strong foundation and work to ensure the 
safety of the Chanhassen community for years to come.
I rise today to recognize the Fremont 
County Office of Emergency Management (OEM) and Department of 
Transportation (DOT) for their lifesaving work to keep roads clear and 
restore power during a record-breaking winter storm in March of 2024. 
This harsh winter storm brought over thirteen inches of snow and caused 
major power outages throughout the county.
  Staff from the Fremont County Office of Emergency Management, led by 
Emergency Manager Mykel Kroll, and the Fremont County Department of 
Transportation, led by Director Mike Whitt, worked overtime and over 
weekends throughout inclement weather conditions to clear roadways and 
restore traffic to over 700 miles of mountainous roadways in the 
county. Together, they freed an elderly woman who had been trapped in 
her car by the snow, secured housing for a family who were victims of a 
fire, restored power to a residential care

facility in Florence, rescued a man caught in his vehicle after an 
avalanche, and helped maintain power for a family with a young child 
who relies on a supplemental oxygen supply.
  Under some of the most extreme conditions possible, Fremont County 
OEM and DOT did an exemplary job of saving lives and serving our 
community during this storm.
  On behalf of the people of Colorados 7th Congressional District, it 
is my honor to recognize Florence County Office of Emergency Management 
and Department of Transportation for their outstanding work and service 
to our communities.
I rise today to recognize and honor the 
unique contributions of my constituents, Sue and George Cannella. Sue 
has worked at the Pregnancy &amp; Family Life Center (``the Center) as a 
volunteer two days a week since 2015. She is the lead volunteer in the 
Food Pantry and, as such, shoulders the lions share of responsibility 
for ensuring that USDA and non-USDA food items are received, maintained 
and provided to the Centers clients which includes pregnant Moms, 
Dads, and families. Sue is extremely dedicated to the clients at the 
Center and her work pays off. Last year alone, more than 6,000 clients 
were helped in the food pantry and 65,000 pounds of food distributed. 
Additionally, Sue ensures moms receive essential items needed for their 
infants and young children to include formula, diapers, pull ups, baby 
wipes, and wash, as well as age specific clothing items such as 
onesies, pajamas, shirts, shorts, pants, and shoes. She does all of 
this with a warm smile to greet clients, families, staff, and 
volunteers alike. No job is too large or challenging for Sue. Sue and 
her husband, George, are quite the team. George comes to the Center at 
least one day a week to break down numerous boxes which previously 
contained food or donations from big box stores such as Big Lots or 
CVS. George also performs maintenance as needed throughout the Center. 
Sue and George distribute nutritious food boxes monthly to five 
veterans who otherwise would go without much needed food. They have 
selfless, generous, and kind hearts in service to Our Lord and the 
Centers clients. They remain a source of inspiration and hope for 
women experiencing planned and unplanned pregnancies. They understand 
that a smile, a kind word, or a joke makes all the difference to 
families in need.
  It is clear that Mr. and Mrs. Cannella have made a profoundly 
positive impact on our community, and I am grateful for their service.
I rise today to recognize and honor the 
unique contributions made in our community by one of my constituents, 
Jackson Davis, who is currently in his first year of college. As part 
of his Eagle Scout Project, Jackson raised enough funds to buy a bus 
and all the supplies needed to convert the bus into a food pantry on 
wheels. He then donated the mobile food pantry to Messengers of Hope 
for use throughout the community. For his tremendous efforts, Jackson 
was recognized as the Eagle Scout Project of the Year for 2023. Jackson 
further inspired his family, extended family, friends, and fellow 
scouts to volunteer at Messengers of Hope to serve groceries and 
participate in other service projects. Part of what makes our country 
so great is the willingness of ordinary Americans to go above and 
beyond to selflessly give back to others. Volunteerism is one of the 
cornerstones of our society and part of the fabric that unites us.
  It is clear that Mr. Jackson Davis has made a profoundly positive 
impact on our community, and I am grateful for his service.
I rise today to recognize and honor the 
unique contributions made in our community by one of my constituents, 
Jack Asbury, who is lovingly known as the ``Batman of Spring Hill. 
a father who knows what it is like to have kids in the 
hospital. He decided to dedicate his time outside of being an EMT by 
turning into Batman and visiting kids in hospitals and cancer centers. 
He also works with bullied kids and even adults going through hard 
times. This man has seen the most horrific things in life, yet still 
makes time to bring light into peoples darkest moments. Part of what 
makes our country so great is the willingness of ordinary Americans to 
go above and beyond to selflessly give back to others. Volunteerism is 
one of the cornerstones of our society and part of the fabric that 
unites us.
  It is clear that Mr. Jack Asbury has made a profoundly positive 
impact on our community, and I am grateful for his service.
I rise today to celebrate the Bicentennial of 
Seneca County, Ohio. The values of the pioneers and settlers who 
overcame the challenges faced during the early years of the countys 
history have persisted throughout the past 200 years. The hard work and 
spirit shown by generations of county residents have made Seneca County 
an outstanding example of American ingenuity.
  Native American tribes inhabited Seneca County before Christopher 
Columbus arrived in the Americas. Initially, these tribes were the 
mound builders. but they were followed later by the Seneca and Wyandot 
tribes. European settlers arrived in the region after General William 
Henry Harrison established Fort Ball in 1813. In 1824, the Ohio 
Legislature enacted legislation creating Seneca County and named it 
after the original tribes that inhabited the area.
  In the 1830s, agriculture spurred commercial activity throughout the 
county. With the construction of the Mad River and Lake Erie Railroad, 
the county began to build its economy and population. Currently, the 
county encompasses roughly 553 square miles and has a population of 
over 55,000. The county is an asset to the great State of Ohio through 
its many contributions in the fields of manufacturing and agriculture.
, by remembering the 200th Anniversary of Seneca County, 
community members recognize the outstanding achievements, maintain the 
pioneer attitude, and strive to better their county through the 
principles on which it was founded. I thank and congratulate Seneca 
County on this significant milestone.