CELEBRATING THE 100TH ANNIVERSARY OF AMHERST H. WILDER FOUNDATIONS 
             COMMUNITY MENTAL HEALTH AND WELLNESS SERVICES
I rise today to honor Amherst H. Wilder 
Foundation in Saint Paul, Minnesota on its 100th anniversary of 
providing community mental health and wellness services. For 100 years, 
this nonprofit organization has provided vital and supportive mental 
health services to children and families in Saint Paul.
  Wilders Child Guidance Clinic was founded in 1924 as one of the 
first of its kind in the Nation. It is an outpatient psychiatric clinic 
for children and their families and is nationally acclaimed for its 
treatment as well as its training center. Serving children who are 
experiencing emotional distress, it is one of the oldest continuously 
operated childrens clinics in the country.
  Currently, Wilder provides outpatient mental health and wellness 
services for children,

adults, and families, as well as addiction and recovery services for 
adults at Wilder Community Mental Health &amp; Wellness Clinic--a Certified 
Community Behavioral Health Clinic (CCBHC) in Minnesota. As a CCBHC, 
Wilder increases access to community-based mental health and substance 
use disorder services, especially to underserved communities and serves 
individuals through in-person and telehealth appointments, regardless 
of ability to pay. Wilders diverse team of mental health experts 
provides culturally appropriate mental health and wellness services 
that support people and their families. In addition, Wilder delivers 
mental health and wellness services in schools across Saint Paul and 
the Twin Cities.
, please join me in paying tribute to the caring and 
dedicated mental health professionals, practitioners, and staff of 
Amherst H. Wilder Foundation--as well as the people they serve--as they 
celebrate 100 years of providing critical community mental health and 
wellness services.
I rise today to recognize the 90th 
Anniversary of Eddies Restaurant in Sylvan Beach, New York. Eddie 
Stewart, Sr. and his wife, Florence ``Fifi Stewart, opened Eddies 
Restaurant in 1934 as a seasonal hot dog stand on the shore of Oneida 
Lake. At the time, the hot dog stand seated eight people on stools. 
Daily, the restaurant reaches maximum capacity of 250 people and offers 
delicious American and Italian cuisine to residents and visitors of 
Sylvan Beach.
  Eddies and Fifis legacy spans five generations and is now owned by 
their grandson, Edward (Rick) Stewart, III. The previous owners to Rick 
(Edward III) Stewart were Edward Stewart, Jr. and Leslie Wolcott 
Stewart. The rest of the Eddies Restaurant legacy lies in Rick (Edward 
III) and his wife, Wendy; their great-grandson, Edward IV and his wife, 
Madelyn; a soon to be born great-great-grandson, Eddie V; great-
granddaughter, Emily; great-grandchildren, Daunte and Nevaeh; their 
granddaughter, Alison and her husband, Anthony; and great-
grandchildren; Ava Santa and Ania.
  Eddies Restaurant prides themselves on using high-quality 
ingredients to create their delicious meals and provide fast and 
friendly service. Over the years, Eddies has provided service to many 
public figures such as Frank Sinatra, Duke Ellington, George Foreman, 
Harry James, Liza Minnelli, and The Ink Spots. Eddies welcomes all 
individuals with their familial hospitality. The freshest fish, 
homemade Meat and Marinara sauce, hand-rolled meatballs, Italian house 
dressing, homemade pie, and ice cream desserts all can be found at this 
incredible family owned business.
  Recognizing a long-standing family-owned business for their 
dedication and diligence to enhancing their community is a highlight of 
this position in Congress. Ninety years and five generations of Eddies 
Restaurant is a testament to the love they have for their business and 
community. Congratulations again on this amazing accomplishment.
I rise today to recognize the 40th 
anniversary of the Sylvan Beach New York eatery Harpoon Eddies, and to 
recognize the contributions of Edward Stewart, Jr., and his wife Leslie 
Stewart, posthumously, to the Oneida Lake community. Furthermore, I 
commend the work of Eddie and Leslies son, Edward (Rick) Stewart, III 
and his wife Wendy Stewart, who have continued the tradition of 
excellence through their commitment to service and the community.
  Eddie and Leslie Stewart were married on December 26, 1966, and 
founded Harpoon Eddies in the summer of 1984. The Stewarts wished to 
expand Eddies Restaurant, Inc., to include a separate location on the 
beachfront and thereby include the boating community. After years of 
success, they ultimately became co-owners and operators with their son, 
Rick. Harpoon Eddies has remained a staple in the Oneida Lake 
community through the efforts of the Stewart family since its creation 
and continues to shine across generations.
  Eddie and Leslies contributions to the residents are reflective of 
their personal initiative and drive to give back, values which are 
still evident in their business even after their deaths in 2020 and 
2021, respectively. These values are kept alive through the efforts of 
Rick and Wendy Stewart, who now have sole ownership of the restaurant 
and ensure that it will continue to serve the community just as it has 
for the past 40 years. I urge my colleagues to take the chance to visit 
the incredible beauty of Oneida Lake and to stop by this incredible 
family business. Those who visit are welcome like family under the 
amazing hospitality of the people.
  It is my humble privilege to be part of the celebrations and 
traditions of the Sylvan Beach Community. Thank you to Rick and Wendy 
Stewart for their continued commitment to excellence and their loving 
memoriam of Edward Stewart, Jr. and Leslie Stewart.
I rise today with a heavy heart to honor the 
life of the Honorable Frank W. Chen, who passed away on July 18, 2024. 
Judge Chen formerly served as a commissioner for the Los Angeles County 
Superior Court in California.
  Frank was born in Taipei, Taiwan on November 11, 1963, to his parents 
William and May Chen. Frank moved to the United States at the age of 4 
where he settled in Schenectady, New York and graduated from Mohonasen 
Senior High School. Following his graduation, Frank attended Stanford 
University and graduated in 1985 with a bachelors degree in economics. 
He went on to graduate from the University of California, Los Angeles 
School of Law in 1988 and started his career as a litigation attorney 
in Los Angeles that same year after being admitted to the California 
State Bar.
  Frank met Chen-Yen in December of 1999 and in September 2000, they 
got married and moved to San Marino, CA. They welcomed their first 
child, Nathaniel Chen in 2003 and then second child, Natalina Chen in 
2005. Anyone who knew Frank knew that his family meant more to him than 
anything else. He worked tirelessly to support his family first and 
foremost and to ensure that they could also pursue their passions to 
the fullest.
  Frank is well-known for his pro bono legal work in combating abusive 
litigation. He received awards for his volunteer work with state and 
local prosecutors, local elected officials, legislators, and the State 
Bar of California. In 2003, Frank was named a recipient of California 
Lawyer Magazines Attorney of the Year (CLAY). That same year, Frank 
was a recipient of the Asian Pacific American Legal Center of Southern 
Californias Pro Bono Service Award for his work in coordinating a 
unique and sweeping defense to abusive litigation brought by the Trevor 
Law Group of Beverly Hills.
  Since 2005, Frank has been recognized eleven times as a Southern 
California Super Lawyer and three times in the National Super Lawyers 
Business Edition. He was also named one of Pasadena Magazines Top 
Attorneys from 2010-2018. Frank first became interested in judicial 
service while working as a volunteer Temporary Judge for the Los 
Angeles County Superior Court beginning in 2005 where he presided over 
small claims. In December 2018, Frank was elected by the judges of the 
Los Angeles Superior Court to become the Los Angeles Superior Courts 
Court Commissioner. Frank became the Los Angeles Superior Courts third 
Taiwanese-born judicial officer and was the fifth nationwide.
  Frank was also a well-respected leader in his community. He was a 
former president of the Southern California Chinese Lawyers Association 
(SCCLA) and the Taiwanese American Lawyers Association (TALA). He 
served as a trustee of the Los Angeles County Bar Association (LACBA) 
and as a board member of the Asian Pacific American Bar Association of 
Los Angeles County (APABA). Frank was also a proud blood donor to local 
American Red Cross blood banks. He also was a supporter of many online 
musicians within the Twitch music community and greeted audiences for 
the past three years as a moderator, fan and friend. Frank was also a 
faithful member of San Marino Community Church where he served as an 
Elder and recently joined the Chancel Choir with his wife.
  He is survived by many loving family members, including his wife 
Chun-Yen, son Nathaniel, daughter Natalina, parents William and May 
Chen, brother Henry Chen and sister-in-law Julie, and nephew Matthew 
and niece Natalie. May his memory serve as an inspiration to all who 
knew him.
the Ninth Congressional District of 
Virginia and the entire Commonwealth of Virginia mourn the loss of 
Smyth County Sheriffs Deputy Hunter Reedy.
. The incident turned tragic, with the driver 
firing their weapon at Sheriffs deputies and Marion Police officers. 
As a result of the gunfire, Deputy Reedy was shot and killed.
  A graduate of Chilhowie High School in 2014, Deputy Reedy pursued a 
career dedicated to law enforcement. He began by serving more than 
three years with the Chilhowie Police Department. In 2021, he then 
joined the Smyth County Sheriffs Office. His interest in the 
protection and care of his fellow citizens was profound.
  Law enforcement and community members mourn the tragic loss of their 
beloved colleague and friend. Sheriff Shuler of Smyth County laments 
losing a brave hero in Deputy Reedy. Deputy Reedys passing is a solemn 
reminder of the dangerous tasks law enforcement officials must endure.
  Family was an important part of Deputy Reedys life. He is survived 
by his wife, Bettina Quen Reedy, whom he had been married to since 
2020, and his three kids, Brantley, Kaden, and Kaede Belle.
. While his life was cut 
hastily short, his service to the Smyth County Sheriffs Office and the 
people of Smyth County had impacts that will last many years to come.
today, I introduce the Ensuring Child Health 
Coverage Compensation in Divorce Act of 2024. This bill would require 
that when a court directs a non-custodial parent (including a 
stepparent) to provide health insurance for a child, the other parent 
may get reimbursed directly from the insurer for any out-of-pocket 
medical expenses for the child incurred by such parent, regardless of 
the source of insurance.
  In a divorce, one parent is typically court-ordered to provide health 
insurance for the child. However, the other parent may pay for out-of-
pocket medical expenses for the child that are reimbursable by the 
insurer. Under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, 
group health insurers are required to directly reimburse a parent who 
pays for reimbursable out-of-pocket medical expenses when the other 
parent has been court-ordered to provide health insurance for the 
child. However, other health insurers are not required to reimburse the 
other parent directly. This bill would require all health insurers to 
provide such reimbursement.
  I urge my colleagues to support this bill.
today I introduce the ``Justice for 
Victims of Foreign Vessel Accidents Act, with Congressman Henry C. 
``Hank Johnson (D-GA) as the original cosponsor.
  For years, I have been working to recapitalize the U.S.-flag 
international fleet of oceangoing, commercial vessels needed to support 
our military. I was honored to serve as the top Democrat on the House 
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructures Subcommittee on Coast 
Guard and Maritime Transportation from 2013 to 2018.
  Less than a week after the foreign-flagged Dalia collided with the 
Francis Scott Key Bridge in Baltimore Harbor, the vessels Singapore-
based corporate owner filed in the U.S. District Court for Maryland to 
limit its total liability for the bridge collapse and recovery effort 
to just $43.7 million, valuing the vessel at $90 million. In doing so, 
the Dalias owner invoked a federal law enacted in 1851, limiting their 
legal liability for damages to the dollar value of the vessel and its 
cargo, minus salvage costs. This tragic accident, which killed six and 
injured two workers on the Francis Scott Key Bridge, calls into serious 
question why U.S. law affords the owners of vessels flying foreign 
``flags of convenience any liability shield.
  Foreign-flagged commercial vessels like the Dalia are typically 
registered under the laws of unscrupulous jurisdictions that lack any 
Navy, Coast Guard, or ability to inspect commercial vessels to ensure 
safety, prevent environmental degradation, or stop maritime labor 
abuses. Furthermore, foreign ocean carriers or other vessel owners 
flying flags of convenience are often domiciled in offshore tax havens. 
For these reasons and more, U.S.-flag commercial vessels are already at 
a competitive disadvantage globally. The U.S. judicial system should 
not protect foreign competitors to the detriment of victims and their 
families.
  That is why our ``Justice for Victims of Foreign Vessel Accidents 
Act would increase the liability for foreign-flagged vessels to up to 
10 times the dollar value of the vessel and its cargo, minus expenses. 
This would ensure that victims and their families can hold foreign 
vessel owners accountable in federal court for wrongful death or 
personal injury claims. Current law only allows compensation for lost 
wages. Importantly, our bill would maintain the current liability 
threshold for U.S.-flagged vessels including those compliant with the 
Jones Act, which unlike foreign-flagged vessels are subject to U.S. law 
and inspected regularly by the Coast Guard and state regulators. 
Lastly, our bill would apply the higher liability level for damages by 
foreign-flagged vessels to March 25, 2024, the night before the Francis 
Scott Key Bridges collapse.
, I strongly support the Maryland Delegation and the 
Biden-Harris Administrations ongoing work to rebuild the Francis Scott 
Key Bridge with federal funding as quickly as possible. I hope that the 
House will act swiftly on Congressman Kweisi Mfumes (D-MD) ``Baltimore 
Bridge Response Invests and Delivers Global Economic (BRIDGE) Relief 
Act (H.R. 7961). In the meantime, I encourage all Members of the 
House will join us in cosponsoring this commonsense reform.
I rise today to extend my deepest condolences 
to the family and friends of Coach Carl Bowser, who passed away last 
month. While Coach Bowser was a pillar of the Bakersfield College 
football program, his legacy extends beyond the field, evident in the 
outpouring of love following his death and the honors proclaimed of 
Coach Bowsers impact on the lives of others. He was a great man, a 
beloved mentor, and a leader who made positive contributions to 
countless individuals.
  Born in Oklahoma, Carl Bowser was first introduced to Bakersfield 
Colleges football program when he became a team water boy. His passion 
for the sport led him to become a fullback for California Polytechnic 
State University, San Luis Obispo (Cal Poly), where he rushed for 620 
yards and seven touchdowns in 1959. Coach Bowser demonstrated early on 
his perseverance in the face of tragedy when he narrowly survived the 
tragic 1960 Cal Poly plane crash, losing 16 of his teammates. Coach 
Bowser would go on later that year to rush for 288 yards and score two 
touchdowns. In 1962, Coach Bowser completed his bachelors degree at 
Cal Poly in physical education and returned the following year to earn 
his masters degree in education.
  Coach Bowser soon sharpened his passion for coaching football, 
serving as the Head Coach of Burroughs High School in Ridgecrest and 
later as Head Coach at Shafter High School. Joining Bakersfield 
Colleges program, Coach Bowser served as the Renegades Assistant Coach 
under Head Coach Gerry Collis for 17 years before rising to the Head 
Coach position in 1984.
  Coach Bowsers masterful 83-31-3 career record across 11 seasons will 
certainly be remembered as a golden age of Renegade athletics. Second 
to no other season, was the teams 1988 triumphs, where under Coach 
Bowsers leadership, the Renegades beat the undefeated Fullerton 
College Hornets to secure the 1988 Junior College Football 
Championship. Coach Bowser earned the esteemed title of Conference 
Coach of the Year four times, where his team won six Western State 
Conference titles, and earned seven Potato Bowl appearances before his 
retirement from the program in 1994.

  Coach Bowser was well-known for his rousing halftime and pre-game 
speeches. Yet his strong heart and easy laugh made him beloved by 
everyone who knew him. Under his leadership, the Bakersfield College 
football program thrived, and his influence continues to this day.
  The hundreds of students and athletes he trained will never forget 
how Coach Bowser dedicated his life to fostering excellence on and off 
the field. Aware of the steep climb players face seeking professional 
football careers, Coach Bowser taught personal life discipline which 
would set his players up for success beyond football. His Interest in 
the lives of his players both on and off the field makes this loss 
particularly difficult, serving as a reminder of his unique way of 
leading strongly but with grace and empathy.
  On behalf of the 20th Congressional District, I would like to extend 
my deepest sympathies to Coach Bowsers family, the Bakersfield College 
community, and all who were fortunate enough to have known him.
I include in the Record the following 
newsletter to give an update to my constituents on issues surrounding 
spending bills, healthcare consolidation, and government regulations.
       Dear Friend, Im disappointed that the Do Our Job Act, the 
     bill I introduced to keep us in DC until our budget work is 
     completed, did not get the support it needed and deserved to 
     make it to a committee hearing. But Ive learned that many 
     ideas need to be introduced many times before they get 
     traction. Fixing how Washington works will not be easy, so I 
     am undeterred, and Ill continue to push for this reform.
       While I enjoy time in the district with my constituents, I 
     would rather be in DC passing the rest of our appropriations 
     bills and avoiding the threat of another government shutdown 
     or continuing resolution.
       The Do Our Job Act would have made sure that Congress did 
     not leave for this district work period unless the House 
     passed all 12 annual appropriations bills. While the House 
     Appropriations Committee, which I am a member of, passed all 
     12 spending bills to be considered by the House, the House 
     has only passed five of these 12 spending bills.
       In the nearly five decades that our current appropriations 
     process has been in place, Congress has only passed all 12 
     bills four times. Four times in almost 50 years. Western 
     North Carolinians and the American people deserve better than 
     an 8 percent success rate for funding our government.
       The American people have been far too generous with us, and 
     it is high time that we fix how Washington works.

       Western North Carolina is no stranger to high healthcare 
     costs, and as a member of the House Budget Committee, I want 
     to share what we learned from the committee hearing that 
     evaluated the budgetary effects of healthcare consolidation.
       The hearing discussed the unsustainable trajectory of 
     federal health spending and policy opportunities to combat 
     consolidation and enhance free market competition; or to put 
     it simply, how to make health care more affordable and more 
     accessible for the American people.
       The U.S. is seeing a surge in hospital mergers, resulting 
     in increased federal health spending and higher patient 
     costs. Simultaneously, patients have been experiencing lower 
     quality of care, which is a less easily quantifiable but 
     arguably worse consequence than dealing with high costs.
       This is the reality right here in our mountains following 
     the Mission HCA Healthcare acquisition in 2019. That is why I 
     have demanded the Federal Trade Commission, the agency 
     responsible for all acquisitions and mergers, re-review the 
     Mission/HCA deal and take action to overturn the acquisition 
     if malfeasance is found.
       It is my mission as a member of the House Budget Committee 
     and House Appropriations Committee to promote policies and 
     funding that deter consolidation and promote greater choice, 
     affordability, and quality of care for the citizens of NC-11 
     and beyond.

       During my time in our mountains, I continuously hear from 
     constituents who are interested in developing environmentally 
     challenged properties in Western North Carolina but decide 
     not to because of the significant cleanup, redevelopment 
     costs and time delays that are often required from 
     environmental contamination.
       The Economic Opportunity for Distressed Communities Act 
     that I introduced would provide a tax incentive for those who 
     decide to redevelop Superfund and brownfield areas by 
     designating such environmentally challenged properties as 
     Opportunity Zones. By incentivizing cleanup and development 
     of brownfield and Superfund sites, we can create jobs, 
     business opportunities and increase property values for 
     Western North Carolina and nationwide.

       As a small business owner, I have experienced the real-life 
     consequences of new government regulations imposed by 
     Washington bureaucrats who do not understand the implications 
     of their misguided rules.
       The Show Me the Science Act that I introduced would require 
     federal agencies to publish the data that they use to inform 
     decisions behind new rules. If a federal agency cannot prove 
     that the benefits of a new rule outweigh the costs, then we 
     should not burden the American people and Main Street 
     businesses with unnecessary regulations.
       Federal agencies make legally binding requirements on the 
     public, often with an inability or unwillingness to share the 
     information that they use to form the basis of their rules 
     and fail to calculate the costs and benefits of those rules 
     for American taxpayers.
       We need to fix how Washington works by requiring more 
     transparency in federal rulemaking and improving 
     congressional and public oversight of the rulemaking process.

       Join my next in-person town hall in Macon County on 
     Thursday, August 15. The town hall will take place from 5:30 
     to 7:00 p.m. at the Robert C. Carpenter Community Building, 
     1288 Georgia Rd., Franklin, NC.
       Im looking forward to sharing an update about the latest 
     legislative opportunities

     and challenges in Congress and answering questions about the 
     issues that matter to you. Dont miss out on this opportunity 
     to connect with fellow Western North Carolinians who care 
     deeply about our district and nation.
           With my warmest regards,
                                                    Chuck Edwards,
     Member of Congress.
RECOGNIZING MAJ. WALTER T. TANIMOTO FOR HIS SERVICE TO WASHINGTONS 
                             of washington
I rise today to recognize the 
honorable life of Major Walter T. Tanimoto, a distinguished veteran, 
volunteer, and father. Mr. Tanimoto, in his military service, career, 
and personal endeavors, left a mark of service, dedication, and a deep 
commitment to community.
  Walt took on the task of protecting his country with devotion and 
skill. Through his service in Operation Iraqi Freedom II, Walt received 
a variety of accolades, including a Combat infantry Badge. Walt never 
stopped sacrificing for our country even after leaving the Army, 
embarking on a long, impactful, and dedicated career at the Washington 
Department of Revenue.
He maintained active 
participation in multiple veterans organizations, but rather than 
simply belonging to veterans groups, Walt had leadership roles in 
three separate organizations, including Veterans of Foreign Wars and 
the Military Order of the Cootie.
  I had the privilege to meet Walt multiple times through his ongoing 
participation in these organizations, a demonstration of his commitment 
to his community and desire to support others. Most recently, I recall 
Walts efforts in June 2023 on the planning and execution of a Veterans 
History Project that my office hosted with the Nisei Veterans 
Committee. Through his participation, Walt helped preserve the stories 
of his fellow veterans for future generations.
, I once again draw your attention to the life of service 
and generosity led by my constituent, Walter T. Tanimoto. Many can 
aspire to dedicate their lives to others, but few can say they have 
done it as Walt has.
I rise today to recognize and remember 
an outstanding constituent from my district who recently passed away; 
Bishop D.C. Thomas. Bishop Thomas was born and raised in nearby 
Trenton, New Jersey, and worked tirelessly to positively impact his 
community for his entire life.
  In 1985, Bishop Thomas developed an afterschool program to help 
elementary and middle school students in Trenton. But his efforts to 
assist Trentons younger population did not stop there. Bishop Thomas 
also started a youth summer camp, which not only provided the children 
of Trenton with summer activities, but it also ensured that every 
attendee would be properly fed. Later, Bishop Thomas started a food 
delivery program that helped families in need. This mobile kitchen 
provided families throughout Trenton with consistent access to hot 
meals.
  Perhaps Bishop Thomass most impressive accomplishment is the 
Christian Home Better Life Development Center. This center began as an 
unhabitable home, but through his tireless work, was transformed into a 
rehabilitation center. Without any subsidies or grants, Bishop Thomas 
helped over 300 individuals battling drug and alcohol addictions by 
working to turn their lives around. Today many individuals who once 
passed through its doors are employed and married with families.
  We are eternally grateful for the work that Bishop D.C. Thomas has 
demonstrated throughout his life and our community is a better place 
because of his extraordinary service. May he rest in peace.