I rise today to celebrate a truly remarkable 
milestone--the 100th birthday of Mr. Jack Richtman, a true American 
hero.
  Jacks life is a testament to resilience, service, and the enduring 
power of family. A longtime resident of Elburn, Illinois, Jack served 
our Nation with distinction during World War II. Six months after D-
Day, he landed on the beaches of Normandy, bravely fighting in six 
battles as a gunner on a mortar unit for the Armys 71st Infantry 
Division. His contributions were instrumental in aiding Allied forces 
in post-war efforts throughout Europe.

  Growing up on the South Side of Chicago, he faced the challenges of 
the Great Depression, eventually moving to Wisconsin to continue his 
education. While a Junior in high school, Jacks patriotism ignited 
after the bombing of Pearl Harbor, and he enlisted in the Army Air 
Corps. His dedication to service led him to the artillery unit, where 
he honed his skills through rigorous training in California. After the 
war, Jack served in Austria and returned home with a lifetime of 
memories and a heart full of gratitude for his fellow servicemembers 
and the freedoms he defended.
  Upon returning home, Jack married his high school sweetheart, Karwyn, 
building a life filled with love in St. Paul, Minnesota. Their union 
blossomed into a remarkable family of 12 children, a testament to their 
unwavering commitment to each other. With a degree in chemistry, Jacks 
career led him to Illinois in 1971, eventually landing in Elburn in the 
1990s, where he has resided ever since.
  After 32 years of marriage his wife Karwyn passed away in 1978, but 
Jacks love for family never wavered. He found love again with Mary 
Perkins, a widow with eight children, whom he married in 1980. This 
union brought together a blended family of 19 children, and has 
blossomed to include 52 grandchildren, and 52 great-grandchildren.
  Today, surrounded by his loving family, he stands as a beacon of 
strength, embodying the spirit of sacrifice and service that defined 
his generation. Jack continues to live a fulfilling and energetic life 
in Elburn with his son, Tom.
, I am proud to celebrate Jack Richtman and I ask my 
colleagues to join me in recognizing Jack Richtmans extraordinary life 
and unwavering patriotism. He is an inspiration to us all, and his 
100th birthday serves as a reminder of the sacrifices made by those who 
came before us.
I rise today to celebrate and 
recognize the Reeves-Reed Arboretum on their 50-year anniversary. I am 
grateful to be able to celebrate this incredible milestone with the 
Reeves-Reed family and our community. The Reeves-Reed Arboretum is a 
beautiful natural setting of a forest and gardens that engages, 
enriches, and teaches its visitors about environmental stewardship. For 
the past 50 years, they have shown their dedication to our community 
through programs and activities for all ages to grow through connecting 
with nature. Reeves-Reed has something for everyone, including summer 
camps for children, gardening and hiking groups, scout events, and many 
opportunities to learn and reflect. As a non-profit organization, the 
Arboretum and its staff are dedicated to their mission of helping our 
community and being an educational and spiritual resource for its 
visitors. Reeves-Reed is also a cornerstone of Summits cultural 
landscape, and its 13.5 acres are listed on both the National and State 
Registers of Historic Places. As we reflect on the past 50 years at 
Reeves-Reed they have exceeded the expectations and I know they will 
continue to do so for the next 50 years to come. I am honored to have 
such an amazing community in the 7th Congressional District, and I look 
forward to what is to come.
I rise today to celebrate the 
76th anniversary of City Market, the supplier to Sea Island Corporation 
and many other restaurants in South Georgia.
  City Market was founded in 1848 in Brunswick by Harold Sigmund and 
E.W. Stanford, Sr. Upon E.W. Stanford, Sr.s death that same year, his 
18-year-old son and E.W. ``Captain Red Stanford, Jr. took over the 
business. The two eventually bought out Mr. Sigmond and continued 
building a great reputation for the business.
  City Market then moved to its current location on Gloucester Street 
in 1969. After his passing, Captain Red left the legacy of City Market 
to his grandson, Frank ``Little Red Owens, Jr., as well as his 
brother and sons, Walker and Wyatt Owens. Left to run the packing house 
was his son-in-law, Bruce Collins, Sr.
  Through the dedication of the family and its loyal customers, City 
Market has continued to grow and prosper. Congratulations to City 
Market, a true family business, on 76 years of success and hard work.
I rise today to recognize 
Golfweek Super Senior National Championship Winner Stevie Cannady. Mr. 
Cannady turned 65 in early January, making 2024 his inaugural season in 
the Super Senior division.
  Prior to his National Championship victory, he had his best finish of 
2024 in early May at the Lowcountry Senior invitational, placing in the 
top 5. He hit 86 percent of fairways and 89 percent of greens with a 
final-round score of 70, jumping up to the lead and placing first in 
the National Championship.
  Aside from his many golf achievements, Mr. Cannady owns a logistics 
company specializing in trucking, warehousing, and commercial real 
estate.
  Cannady is a valued member of our community and a force on the golf 
course. Congratulations to Mr. Cannady on an amazing accomplishment, 
and I cant wait to see what he achieves next.
I want to congratulate TAC (The Abilities 
Connection) Industries, a nonprofit organization located in my 
Congressional district, that provides job opportunities to people with 
disabilities through its participation in the AbilityOne Program. 
AbilityOne is a federal program that provides employment opportunities 
to approximately 40,000 people who are blind or have significant 
disabilities, including more than 2,500 veterans.
  TAC Industries recently received the 2024 Innovation Award at Source 
Americas annual X-Force conference in Orlando, Florida. This award 
honors a nonprofit that developed ``innovative work methods, products 
or services. TAC Industries partnered with Clark State College in 
Springfield, Ohio, which is also in my district, to create the Fresh 
Abilities restaurant, a farm-to-table quick service restaurant on the 
campus, which functions simultaneously as an employment center and a 
training program for workers with disabilities.
  Through their partnership, TAC developed a curriculum that included 
over 100 hours of classroom instruction and hands-on skill building. 
They utilized the colleges classroom facilities for their employees 
food safety training. In the restaurant, the employees were then 
trained in how to prepare meals, how to make sales, and develop 
customer service skills.
  Employees at Fresh Abilities gained the unique experience of working 
in a safe, inclusive environment while getting the training and support 
they need to do their jobs to the best of their abilities. Clark State 
students, faculty and employees gained access to healthy food, and the 
colleges administration was able to divert funds previously spent on 
food service to other student-focused areas.
  For individuals with disabilities, the opportunity to pursue a 
fulfilling, meaningful career of ones own choosing with a path for 
advancement is important to their quality of life. I appreciate the 
work TAC Industries undertakes to provide these employment and 
vocational opportunities, and congratulate them on receiving this 
prestigious award.
I rise today to congratulate Dr. Lourdes 
``Lulu Blacksmith on her retirement and to honor her many years of 
dedicated service to communities across Kane County and beyond.
. Born 
in Querendaro, Michoacan, Mexico, she arrived in the United States in 
1974, embracing a new land with open arms and a thirst for opportunity.
  Her career path reflects a commitment to public service and community 
engagement. Dr. Blacksmith began her exemplary career as the Manager of 
Community Outreach at AMITA Health Mercy Medical Center in Aurora, 
Illinois. She went on to serve as the Director of Community Relations 
and District Press Secretary for the Speaker of the U.S. House of 
Representatives, demonstrating her ability to navigate the complexities 
of government and advocate for the needs of constituents. Most 
recently, she served as the Managing Director of Community Engagement 
and Legislative Affairs for Elgin Community College, where she helped 
bridge the gap between education and the community.
  In addition to her professional achievements, Dr. Blacksmith has 
dedicated herself to empowering marginalized communities. In 1999, she 
founded Companeros en Salud, an organization that provides vital 
healthcare resources to the Hispanic community and other diverse 
groups. Her commitment to social justice is evident in her active 
membership in numerous organizations, including the Chicago 
Metropolitan Agency for Planning (CMAP), the Community Foundation of 
the Fox River Valley, RISE of South Elgin, and the St. Charles Chamber 
of Commerce.
  Dr. Blacksmiths tireless efforts have been recognized with numerous 
awards including the Illinois Legislative Latino Caucus Foundations 
Latino Leadership Award, the Quad County Urban Leagues ``Women of 
Power Award, and the Chicago Latino Networks Latina Professionals 
Award.
  Her academic achievements are equally impressive. Dr. Blacksmith 
earned her Doctor of Education degree in Leadership in Higher Education 
and Organizational Change from Benedictine University, a Masters degree 
in Higher Education Leadership from Northeastern Illinois University, 
her Bachelors degree in Liberal Arts with an emphasis on Multicultural 
Studies from DePaul University, and an Associates degree in Applied 
Sciences from Waubonsee Community College.
  Mr Speaker, I am proud to honor Dr. Lourdes ``Lulu Blacksmith. Her 
dedication, leadership, and unwavering commitment to serving others 
have left an indelible mark on our community. I ask my colleagues to 
join me in congratulating her as she embarks on this new chapter in her 
life with her husband Steve, two daughters Nikki and Stefanie, and her 
grandchildren Sophia and Stephen. We wish her the best in her well-
deserved retirement, and we express our gratitude for her contributions 
to Kane County and the Nation.
I rise today to honor and 
remember the life of Charles ``Chuck Bloodworth, a former member of 
the U.S. Army and law enforcement.
He was a distinguished public 
servant who dedicated his life to serving the people of Georgia and the 
United States of America.
  He began his career in the U.S. Army and transitioned into different 
areas within law enforcement. Notably, Mr. Bloodworth worked in the 
Secret Service where he performed electronic crime investigations and 
worked to protect an array of individuals, including U.S. Presidents.
111, signifying an exceptional life of public service. 
Senator Anavitartes (An-Uh-Vi-Tart-Ey) tribute to Mr. Bloodworth 
highlighted his strong influence that was felt deeply throughout the 
communities that he touched.
I rise today to honor the life of 
Gustavous ``Gus Holmes Bell III of Savannah, GA, who passed away on 
July 22nd at the age of 86.
  Gus, known by many as ``Buster, was a dedicated, hard-working man, 
who earned a degree in Civil Engineer from The Citadel before attending 
graduate school at the University of Kentucky.
  Gus was commissioned as a 2nd Lieutenant as a Reserve Commissioned 
Officer in the U.S. Army. After assignments in Virginia, Texas, and New 
Mexico, Gus moved to Kentucky and was hired in an engineering role. 
Gus, eventually landed in Savannah and was honorably discharged in 
1969.
  Gus was an engineer who was instrumental in establishing a 
partnership between the U.S. and Saudi Arabia. In honor of Guss 
contributions to the city, Former mayor Eddie DeLoach declared August 
11th as ``Gus H. Bell III Day in Savannah.
  Gus was also a founder of St. Andrews on the Marsh School in Savannah 
and a member of First Presbyterian Church in Savannah.
  Gus was married for 42 years to his beloved wife Mandy. After her 
passing, he was blessed to marry Jan Hall. He is survived by his three 
children, Lisa, Adam and Holmes, as well as his grandchildren and great 
grandchildren. We mourn his loss and keep him and his family in our 
prayers.
I rise today to thank and 
congratulate Westfield High School track coach Christopher Tafelski on 
his recent designation by the U.S. Boys Track and Field and Cross 
Country Coaches Association (USTFCCCA) as the 2024 Boys High School 
Track and Field Coach of the Year for the State of New Jersey. This is 
not Coach Tafelskis first award from the USTFCCCA, and I am certain it 
will not be his last. Coaching for the track and field and cross 
country programs at Westfield High School since 2004, Tafelski, a WHS 
alum himself, has worked to build a team that is not only award-
winning, but one with a strong sense of community. Tafelski has led the 
renowned WHS track and field and cross country teams to multiple 
national qualifications and state championship titles among countless 
other accolades. I am honored to have such a dedicated coach and 
educator in out district, and I look forward to seeing both Coach 
Tafelski and the Westfield track and field and cross country programs 
continue to thrive in the years to come.
I rise today to mourn the loss of 
William Arthur ``Bill Hughes, who sadly passed at the age of 96.
  Bill served for three years in the United States Marine Corps and 
attended the FAA Aeronautical Center in Oklahoma City, which launched 
him into his 28-year career as a dedicated air traffic controller.
  After his time in Oklahoma City, Bill and his beloved wife, Nancy, 
lived in Wilmington, North Carolina, Savannah, Georgia, and Isle of 
Hope. After settling down in Isle of Hope, Bill began his second career 
as a ``starter of one of Skidaway Islands golf courses.
Bill played on the Marine Corps football team and was a highly talented 
bowler.
  Bill and his wife Nancy are survived by their three children, 
William, Martha, and Jennings. Mr. Hughes was a hardworking individual 
who will be missed greatly by his family, friends, and coworkers. I 
send my most sincere condolences to Bills wife and three children. My 
thoughts and prayers are with all his family and friends in this 
moment.
today, I introduce the Department of the 
Treasury Officer Protection Act of 2024. This bill would help protect 
Treasury Department police officers and the public by allowing all the 
officers, including those who work at the Bureau of Engraving and 
Printing (BEP), to carry their government firearms home.
  BEP officers are not allowed to take their government firearms home. 
However, BEP officers can be targets because they wear uniforms to and 
from work. Many BEP officers carry personal firearms to and from work 
because they are not allowed to take their government firearms home, 
and some are forced to leave those personal firearms in their cars 
while they are on duty, creating a possibly dangerous situation.
  Allowing BEP officers to carry their government firearms home will 
put them in the same position as Mint officers. Although both agencies 
are under the Treasury Department under Treasury Department rules, Mint 
officers are allowed to carry their government firearms home, while BEP 
officers are not. There is no meaningful distinction between officers 
for these two agencies. They should be treated equally.
  This bill would allow all police officers in the Treasury Department 
to carry their government firearms home to protect officers and the 
public, eliminating separate carrying rules for the Treasury 
Departments different law enforcement agencies.
  I ask my colleagues to support this bill.
on July 25, 2024, I was unable to vote due 
to illness. Had I been present, I would have voted YEA on Roll Call No. 
400.
I rise today to celebrate the City of 
Willards Sesquicentennial. The perseverance of pioneers and settlers 
to overcome the challenges faced during the early years of the citys 
history has persisted throughout the past 150 years. The hard work and 
spirit shown by generations of city residents have made Willard an 
outstanding example of American ingenuity.
  In 1874, the City of Willard was established as a community and a 
junction for the Baltimore and Ohio Railroads line to Sandusky and the 
branch west to Chicago. The original name of Willard was Chicago, 
however, passengers would mistake the community for Chicago, Illinois. 
The citys name was changed to Chicago Junction, but the word 
``junction did not fit on name boards at the time. In 1917, the town 
changed its name to Willard, after the then president of the Baltimore 
and Ohio Railroad, Daniel Willard. In 1960, Willard officially became 
the citys name. The city is an asset to the great State of Ohio 
through its many contributions in the fields of manufacturing and 
agriculture. It remains to this day a key junction for the rail company 
CSX Transportation.
, by remembering the 150th Anniversary of the City of 
Willard, community members recognize the outstanding achievements, 
maintain the pioneer attitude, and strive to better their city through 
the principles on which it was founded. I thank and congratulate 
Willard on this significant milestone.