I rise today to celebrate the 100th 
birthday of Yoshio ``Yosh Nakamura, and to honor his service to our 
country as a Staff Sergeant in the Army Air Corps during World War II. 
Born in California in 1925, Yosh and his family were forced from their 
El Monte farm into the Gila River internment camp after the outbreak of 
World War II. Despite the violation of his rights, when Army recruiters 
arrived at the camp looking for volunteers in 1944, 18-year-old Yosh 
answered ``yes to serve.
  As a member of the highly decorated all-Japanese-American 442nd 
Regimental Combat Team, Yosh served in the European Theater, 
participating in the assault on Mount Folgorito that led to further 
Allied victories in Italy. The 442nd became one of the most highly 
decorated units in U.S. military history. As Yosh said, ``We couldnt 
hide our ancestry. We had Japanese faces, but we had American hearts.
  After his discharge in 1946, Yosh used the GI Bill to earn a 
bachelors and masters degree in fine art from USC and then dedicated 
his career to education. He taught art at Whittier High School and 
became the first professor hired by Rio Hondo College. Yosh and his 
late wife, Grace, became beloved members of the Whittier community.
  I thank Mr. Nakamura for his service, and wish him a happy 100th 
birthday.
I rise today to congratulate a student 
from my district, Ms. Alana Karam, on receiving this years Broward 
County League of Cities Scholarship. This prestigious scholarship is 
awarded each year to a high school senior who has demonstrated a deep 
investment in public service and intends on leading a life focused on 
it.
  Alana is a recent graduate of Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School, 
where she has distinguished herself in our community through her 
passion for law, public policy, and civic engagement. Her 
accomplishments speak volumes, not only about her talents, but also 
about her character and drive.
  For her deep intellect and track record of leadership in and out of 
the classroom, Alana has received well-deserved local and national 
recognition. She earned first place in the Veterans of Foreign Wars 
Voice of Democracy Essay Contest and third place in the Federal Bar 
Associations National High School Essay Contest--both highly 
competitive national honors--and had her Capstone research project 
published in the Journal of Student Research, a rare accomplishment at 
the high school level.
  Beyond her academic achievements, Alana has been an active member of 
DECA and several honor societies, and she has sought real-world 
experience to deepen her understanding of the justice system. During an 
internship at the Broward County Public Defenders Office, she 
encountered firsthand the power of advocacy, and the role reaffirmed 
her desire to dedicate her life to serving her community.

  Looking ahead, Alana will attend Georgetown University this fall, 
where she plans to major in Public Policy or Political Science. She 
aspires to attend law school and ultimately serve as a public defender, 
uplifting marginalized voices and contributing meaningfully to the 
justice system.
, I ask that you and my colleagues join me in celebrating
I rise today to recognize and honor the 
exceptional work of the Marine Corps Attack Drone Team based in 
Quantico, Virginia, for their groundbreaking achievement in conducting 
the first-ever armed First-Person View (FPV) kinetic strike 
demonstration by the Marines in the continental United States. This 
milestone event took place during a live-fire exercise on April 25, 
2025.
  These Devil Dogs used a leading-edge FPV drone integrated with an 
anti-personnel fragmentation payload, which can support other modular 
payloads, which exhibited the flexible and scalable solution in 
contemporary warfare our military urgently requires.
  The results were impressive. The drone engaged and neutralized every 
target in the strike zone, illustrating not only the technical 
effectiveness of the platform, but its immense strategic value in high-
risk, operational environments.
  This capability comes at a time when global conflict is redefining 
how wars are fought. Today, over 70 percent of the causalities in 
Ukraine are from these types of drones. The recent coordinated drone 
strikes carried out by Ukraine against Russian military infrastructure 
are a clear signal: low-cost, highly adaptable drones are reshaping the 
modern battlefield. America must be prepared. This demonstration by our 
Marines shows we are not just responding, but leading. As we scale up 
our investment in unmanned systems, we must prioritize solutions that 
are fast, flexible, and affordable.
  By equipping our Armed forces with reliable, mission-ready tools that 
can be rapidly deployed and continuously improved, we will maintain 
both deterrence and dominance. The Marines at Quantico are proving that 
innovation doesnt require complexity or high cost; rather, it requires 
bold thinking and dedicated execution.
  After 25 years in the Army, I recognize the uniquely critical 
importance of innovation, readiness, and a steadfast commitment to 
success. These Marines modeled all of that and more.
, I invite my colleagues to join me in commending these 
Marines for their bravery, professionalism, and pioneering 
accomplishments with respect to operational drone warfare.
  Their service is indicative of an evolving, strong, and adaptable 
U.S. military and I hope they serve as an inspiration to all Americans.
I rise today to commemorate the 30th 
anniversary of the Srebrenica Genocide.
  I thank the Congress of Bosniaks for bringing together dignitaries, 
faith leaders, human rights advocates, policymakers, scholars, and 
community leaders from around the country to mourn loved ones lost, and 
commit ourselves anew to a future of peace, mutual tolerance, and 
truth.
  I want to give a special welcome to the delegation from my home state 
of Missouri.
  I represent the largest Bosnian community outside of Bosnia and 
Herzegovina. Over the years, Ive had the honor to get to know and

share meals with Bosnian families in my district, so many of whom came 
to Saint Louis in the wake of the tragic wars of the nineties.
  This community has shaped what the city looks and feels like; it has 
added great cultural diversity to the city, immense intellectual 
capital, thriving small businesses, and a strong religious presence.
  Three decades ago, members of our Bosnian community were refugees. In 
1995, Orthodox Serbs under the command of General Ratko Mladic 
initiated a horrific ethnic cleansing campaign against majority-Muslim 
Bosniaks.
  The escalating bloodshed forced 130,000 Bosnian refugees to seek new 
lives in the United States. Thousands more were murdered in Srebrenica.
  We remember those unthinkable events as the Srebrenica Genocide.
  On the 30th Commemoration of the genocide, I wish to honor the memory 
of innocent lives lost and celebrate the courage and indomitable spirit 
of the survivors--especially my Bosnian neighbors, whose wit, warmth, 
and generosity inspires me to seek change.
  With conflict and turmoil roiling every corner of the world, 
including the Western Balkans, it is so important to look back at the 
experiences of the Bosnian people during the wars and genocide of the 
1990s.
  When we say ``never again, we must mean it.
  That is why I am leading bipartisan legislation, the Upholding the 
Dayton Peace Agreement Through Sanctions Act, that would codify and 
mandate key sanctions authorities to send an unmistakable message to 
any actor that threatens the peace, security, stability, or territorial 
integrity of Bosnia.
  Sanctions work.
  The State Department told me that Republika Srpska officials begged 
the U.S., ``Please, no more sanctions. However, much more leverage 
needs to be brought to bear against Dodik and his inner circle, their 
Russian backers, and the corrupt politicians who recklessly use ethnic 
tension to grow their power and wealth.
  This bill has overwhelmingly passed the House multiple times, and I 
am pleased to announce that I reintroduced it earlier this week, 
alongside my fellow co-chairs of the Bosnia Caucus, Representatives 
Turner, Auchincloss, and Bell. With Dodiks separatists emboldened to a 
shocking degree and the institutions of Dayton under overt attack, it 
could not be clearer: the time to enact this legislation is now.
  I thank those who traveled for this Commemoration and their 
commitment to justice and truth. They have many friends in Congress who 
will always fight for a peaceful, prosperous Bosnia and Herzegovina.
I rise today to honor the remarkable 
partnership of Annette and Myron Greenbaum of South Orange, New Jersey, 
who will celebrate their 60th wedding anniversary on July 4, 2025.
  They first met on a group ski trip: Annette was there with a friend, 
Myron with the group. Their first date came shortly after, when Annette 
had an extra theater ticket and invited Myron to join. Neither 
remembers the name of the play, but both remember it led to the next 
meeting. Their second date was a Marx Brothers movie, an early sign 
that laughter would become one of the cornerstones of their life 
together.
  They were married on July 4, 1965, in a small ceremony at a temple on 
Central Park West, followed by a luncheon at the Delmonico Hotel, a 
classic Manhattan venue thats part of the citys long history. In the 
early years of their marriage, Annette and Myron lived in a Brooklyn 
Heights brownstone, enjoying walks along the promenade, afternoons at 
museums, and everything the city had to offer.
  Eventually, they made their home in South Orange, New Jersey, where 
they raised two children and have lived in the same house for more than 
forty years. Along the way, they opened their home to many beloved 
cats--each one a part of the family. Today, they are the proud 
grandparents of three.
  When asked the secret to a long marriage. Annette doesnt give a 
grand declaration, just a simple truth learn to accept each others 
quirks.
  It is my privilege to recognize Annette and Myrons 60 years of 
marriage. Their story is a reminder that the best partnerships are 
built not just on love, but on humor, patience, and a shared life well-
lived.
I rise today to introduce my resolution 
recognizing National Caribbean American Heritage Month. Caribbean 
Americans have enriched our nation through their contributions in the 
arts, sciences, education, business, sports, military, and government.
  Since before our nations founding, millions have emigrated from the 
Caribbean to the United States. Today, more than 8 million Americans 
are either born in the Caribbean or have Caribbean ancestry. Among the 
many influential Caribbean Americans are: Kamala Harris, the first 
African-American Vice President; Colin Powell, the first African-
American Secretary of State; Eric Holder, the first African-American 
Attorney General; Karine Jean-Pierre, the first African-American White 
House Press Secretary; Deval Patrick, first African American Governor 
of Massachusetts; David Paterson, first legally blind and first African 
American to serve as Governor of New York State; Wes Moore, the first 
African American Governor of Maryland; Patrick Gaspard, labor union 
organizer and social justice advocate; Earl Graves, Sr, Founder of 
Black Enterprise; Kareem Abdul-Jabbar, basketball great and social 
activist; Marcus Garvey, Jamaican political activist and Pan-African 
leader.
  Caribbean Americans have made significant contributions to all 
aspects of society, including fine arts, education, business, 
literature, journalism, sports, fashion, politics, government, the 
military, music, science, medicine, engineering, and technology. They 
also share their vibrant culture through festivals, carnivals, music, 
dance, film, food, and literature, enriching the cultural landscape of 
the United States.
  Members of the Caribbean diaspora also have a longstanding legacy of 
economic contributions, both in the U.S. and in their countries of 
origin. Through monetary and social remittances, they play a vital role 
in supporting sustainable economic development in the Caribbean, with 
these contributions representing significant percentages of their home 
countries GDP.
  I would also like to recognize Dr. Claire A. Nelson, Founding 
President of the Institute of Caribbean Studies, as the chief architect 
behind the movement for the official proclamation of June as National 
Caribbean American Heritage Month. Dr. Nelson has convened a network of 
volunteer leaders through the National Caribbean American Heritage 
Month Commemorative Committee to ensure continued recognition and 
celebration of this important month.
  It is essential that Congress continues to acknowledge the invaluable 
contributions of Caribbean Americans to our nations history and their 
role in shaping our future.
, I urge my colleagues to join me in honoring National 
Caribbean American Heritage Month.
today I introduced the ``Bridge Corrosion 
Prevention and Repair Act of 2025 with Representative Mike Bost (R-
IL), Representative Chris Deluzio (D-PA), and Representative Brian 
Fitzpatrick (R-PA). I thank Representative Brownley (D-CA), 
Representative Krishnamoorthi (D-IL), Representative Gottheimer (D-NJ), 
and Representative Elfreth (D-MD) for cosponsoring this legislation.
  Our bipartisan legislation requires all federally funded bridge 
projects to use certified contractors for any corrosion control work 
and employ industry-recognized standards for corrosion mitigation and 
prevention. Specifically, our legislation would prompt State, county, 
and municipal transportation departments to employ qualified, trained 
corrosion control professionals who have completed federally registered 
apprenticeship programs.
  This legislation also builds on a recommendation from the National 
Transportation Safety Board and directs the Department of 
Transportation to study and generate best practices for inspecting and 
addressing corrosion on bridges made of weathering steel.
  In July 2021, the House passed Section 2 of the ``Bridge Corrosion 
Prevention and Repair Act as Section 1116 of former Chairman Peter A. 
DeFazios (D-OR) ``Investing in a New Vision for the Environment and 
Surface Transportation (INVEST) in America Act, of which I was a 
cosponsor. While it was ultimately not included in the Infrastructure 
Investment and Jobs Act (Public Law 117-58), I continue working to 
build upon Chairman DeFazios work on corrosion prevention policy and 
promoting apprenticeships.
  In the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2022 
(Public Law 117-81), I secured Section 813 (Office of Corrosion Policy 
and Oversight employee training requirements) directing the U.S. 
Department of Defense to make use of federally registered 
apprenticeship programs for training military personnel, civilian 
employees, and military construction contractors on anti-corrosion 
activities. Under my amendment to the FY2022 NDAA, the DODs Office of 
Corrosion Policy and Oversight Employee Training Requirements is 
charged with coordinating this work.
  Under the 2021 Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, Congress and the Biden 
Administration are making the largest federal investment to modernize 
our nations infrastructure since the Interstate Highway System was 
established in 1956. Americas corrosion professionals and union 
painters are ready, willing, and able to do the job.
  Our legislation is endorsed by the International Union of Painters 
and Allied Trades (IUPAT) and the Association for Materials Protection 
and Performance (formerly called the National Association of Corrosion 
Engineers and the Society for Protective Coatings).
, I urge all Members of the House to cosponsor the 
``Bridge Corrosion Prevention and Repair Act of 2025.
today, I introduce the Foreign Service 
Voluntary Early Retirement Authority Act of 2025. This bill would allow 
members of the Foreign Service to use Voluntary Early Retirement 
Authority (VERA) when an agency is undergoing a reduction in force 
(RIF) or other restructuring. While most other federal employees are 
eligible for VERA if their agencies are undergoing a RIF or other 
restructuring, the members of the Foreign Service are not.
  I strongly oppose the Trump administrations efforts to fire federal 
employees and to dismantle the federal government, and I will continue 
to fight those efforts using every tool at my disposal. However, it is 
important to mitigate the harm where we can, which this bill would do.
  I urge my colleagues to support this bill.
I rise today to pay tribute to Mr. Kiya 
Batmanglidj on the occasion of his retirement from Federal service. 
Over the past 21 years, Kiya has honorably served the United States in 
both military and civilian service.
  Kiya started his career in public service as an Army noncommissioned 
officer, serving as a paratrooper with the 82nd Airborne Division from 
1986 to 1989. He was also voluntarily recalled to active duty in 
support of Operation Desert Shield.
  For the last ten years, Kiya has served on the House Appropriations 
Committee. He started with the Surveys and Investigations (S&amp;I) staff 
where he served as the branch chief for the defense portfolio. He then 
served briefly on the Military Construction and Veterans Affairs 
Subcommittee working the VA portfolio before transitioning to the 
Defense Subcommittee in 2018.
  On the Defense Subcommittee, while in the House Minority, Kiya 
managed the Army, Defense Wide, and Defense Health accounts. When the 
Republicans assumed the House Majority, Kiya oversaw the Military 
Personnel account and the international security cooperation accounts.
  Kiya considers his greatest Committee accomplishment to be securing 
the funding for a 14.5 percent pay raise for junior enlisted personnel 
starting in 2025, the largest increase in over 40 years.
  Kiyas contributions to Americas warfighters will endure long after 
his tenure in the House of Representatives comes to a close, and I know 
he will continue to do great work to advance our national defense. On 
behalf of a grateful Nation, I join my colleagues today in recognizing 
and commending Kiya for his service to our country. We wish him all the 
best in his future endeavors.
-CORTEZ. Mr. Speaker, on Wednesday, June 25, 2025, I missed 
votes. Had I been present, I would have voted: YEA on Roll Call No. 
179; NAY on Roll Call No. 180; YEA on Roll Call No. 181; and NAY on 
Roll Call No. 182.
I rise today to recognize an extraordinary 
public servant, Ally Castaneda, who is departing my office and 
Washington, D.C. for a new role.
  Ally has been an outstanding member of my team since 2022. She began 
her work as a Legislative Correspondent before becoming a Legislative 
Assistant, and then a Senior Legislative Assistant.
  In every role, Ally was the ultimate professional and went above and 
beyond. This job gives us all an incredible opportunity to better 
peoples lives, and Ally embraced this ideal, She worked hard every day 
to serve the people of Californias 52nd Congressional District.
  Ally led critical pieces of legislation, including the Border Water 
Quality Restoration and Protection Act, and helped secure essential 
funding for our district. In part because of her tireless advocacy, our 
San Diego Congressional delegation has been able to secure millions of 
dollars in funding to address cross-border pollution. For instance, 
last year Ally worked with staff for the San Diego delegation to 
successfully advocate for funding to support environmental 
infrastructure in the Tijuana River Valley Watershed to be included in 
the Water Resources Development Act.
  It is impossible to interact with Ally and not be impressed with her 
encyclopedic policy knowledge, attention to detail, and thoroughness. 
She was always a trusted voice.
  On a personal level, Ally is kind, principled, funny, and generous. 
She cares about the people she works with and the constituents she 
served in Californias 52nd Congressional District. She will be greatly 
missed in our office.
  I thank Ally for her work, both past and future. Were always rooting 
for her.
I rise today to recognize and honor a dear 
friend, Marshall Brachman, on the occasion of his 75th birthday on July 
6, 2025.
  Marshall has long exemplified the best of civic engagement and public 
service. His remarkable career spans more than four decades, beginning 
in 1978, and is defined not only by professional success but by a 
deeply rooted commitment to his community, his faith, and the 
betterment of this country.
  Outside of his accomplished professional life, Marshall has devoted 
himself to civic and philanthropic causes. At just 23 years old, he 
became the youngest treasurer of a Jewish Community Center in the 
United States when he assumed that role at the Fort Worth Jewish 
Community Center. His leadership and vision led him to soon become 
president of the Center as well as Treasurer of the Fort Worth Art 
Museum, now The Modern, setting a high bar for service at a young age.
  Marshalls dedication to community did not stop there. He has been a 
tireless advocate and supporter of Jewish causes both locally and 
nationally, particularly through his involvement with the United Jewish 
Appeal, the Young Leadership Cabinet, the Texas-Israel Exchange, and 
AIPAC. His impact in these organizations is a testament to his belief 
in the power of service, charity, and enduring commitment to ones 
values.
  Marshall is also a trusted voice in public policy and government 
affairs. He has helped countless Members of Congress understand complex 
issues, including providing historical context, and make informed 
decisions. His insight and integrity have made him a valuable advisor 
to many on both sides of the aisle. And to me personally, Marshall has 
been a friend, a sounding board, and an unwavering supporter--qualities 
for which I am sincerely grateful.
  Today, I ask my colleagues to join me in recognizing Marshall 
Brachman for his enduring contributions to civic life, his generous 
spirit, and his invaluable friendship. I extend my warmest wishes to 
him and his family on this milestone birthday and thank him for the 
positive impact he continues to make in so many lives.
  Happy 75th to Marshall.
I rise to recognize the retirement 
of Mr. George Woodward. After eighteen years of dedicated service, Mr. 
Woodward is stepping down from his responsibilities as the Director of 
Public Affairs for the 82nd Training Wing at Sheppard Air Force Base in 
Wichita Falls, Texas.
  Throughout his 30-year career as a Public Affairs Specialist, Mr. 
Woodward has been a tremendous source of expertise for the United 
States Air Force. Mr. Woodward has served in a number of critical roles 
and commands, including the 927th Air Refueling Wing at MacDill Air 
Force Base, Florida and European Regional Medical Command at Sembach 
Air Base, Germany. Mr. Woodward subsequently returned to the United 
States where he took the position of Director of Public Affairs for the 
82nd Training Wing, where he has faithfully served the outstanding men 
and women at Sheppard Air Force Base.
  At Sheppard, Mr. Woodward diligently supervised eighteen employees 
who delivered clear and well-informed communications support on behalf 
of the installation and sixty other training locations around the 
world. As the official spokesperson for the base, Mr. Woodward advised 
the commanding general on the effects of policies and actions on the 
bases relationship with internal and external audiences and was 
responsible for testing and executing crisis communication plans and 
procedures, serving as the base liaison with state and federal 
legislators, and overseeing a $1.3 million audiovisual contract.
  During his tenure, Mr. George Woodward led public relations efforts 
on critical developments at Sheppard Air Force base, such as the bases 
groundbreaking on a $27 million Child Development Center and the 82nd 
Training Wings overhaul of the Air Forces Wartime Training Plan. Mr. 
Woodward also supported visits to Sheppard, including from the 
Secretary of the Air Force and Air Force Chief of Staff, Air Education 
and Training Command leadership, and foreign dignitaries. As the 
Director of Public Affairs, Mr. Woodward also led the communications 
efforts for the bases 75th anniversary and Guardians of Freedom 
Thunderbirds Air Show.
  On behalf of the entire Congress and a grateful Nation, as well as 
the thousands of Airmen who served at Sheppard Air Force Base 
throughout his eighteen-year tenure, I express my sincere gratitude and 
appreciation to Mr. George Woodward for his outstanding leadership and 
unwavering support for the missions of the U.S. Air Force.