today, I honor a milestone 
that marks the passage of time and the rich tapestry of history and 
community woven into the fabric of Martin County. As the countys 
residents commemorate its Semiquincentennial, let us reflect upon 250 
years of resilience, progress, and unity that have shaped the county.
  The countys history begins with the Tuscarora, who first inhabited 
the region that became Martin County. They referred to the area as 
``Squhawky. The Tuscarora lived off the lush forest of present-day 
Martin County and used the Roanoke River as an important trade route 
with other tribes in the coastal plain region. The Tuscarora migrated 
to other North Carolina and Virginia sites when the first English 
settlers began inhabiting the area in the early 1770s.
  In the anxious year of 1774, Martin County emerged from annexes of 
Halifax and Tyrrell Counties, born from the tireless efforts of 
residents who sought a closer seat of county government. The county was 
named for the last Royal Governor of North Carolina, Josiah Martin. The 
countys name would later be used to honor Alexander Martin, a 
prominent Federalist of the Old North State. Incorporated in 1779, 
Williamston, the cherished county seat, earned the moniker of ``Tar 
Landing, a testament to its pivotal role along the Roanoke River.
  Throughout history, the county and Williamston have served as 
transportation centers for naval stores such as tar, pitch, turpentine, 
and other resources. The railroads of the 1800s and the highways of the 
1900s continued to allow trade in the region to flourish.
  The Roanoke River, a lifeline coursing through the county, has 
witnessed triumphs and tribulations, from its days as the ``Moratuck 
to the modern era where it beckons adventurers and anglers alike. Let 
us remember the floods of 1940, a catalyst for change that birthed the 
Roanoke River Basin Association and paved the way for progress in flood 
mitigation and environmental stewardship.
  From the bustling heart of Williamston to the tranquil hamlets of Oak 
City, Hamilton, and beyond, our communities and municipalities stand as 
testaments to the resilience and ingenuity of generations past and 
present.
  At Martin Countys 250th anniversary, let us celebrate our past 
achievements and recommit ourselves to the ideals of unity, resilience, 
and progress that have defined the county. Together, let us continue to 
write the next chapter of the countys story, guided by the enduring 
spirit of those who came before us.
  I wish a happy Semiquincentennial to Martin County. Heres to another 
250 years of heritage, community, and boundless possibility.
I rise today to honor the life of Judge 
Onzlee Ware, who passed away on February 10, 2024, at the age of 70.
  He was born in North Carolina on January 4, 1954, to the late Onzlee 
McCrimmon and Edna Taylor.
  While attending North Carolina Agricultural and Technical State 
University, Onzlee was charged with possession of heroin and marijuana, 
but later had those charges dropped when he agreed to become a police 
informant. A year later, it was revealed in court that he was an 
informant. Because of that revelation, he was subsequently shot and 
critically wounded, eventually losing his left leg. This harrowing 
experience would shape the rest of his life and reinforce his belief in 
second chances.
  He would later come to Roanoke to work with Boy Scouts of America, 
which is where we met. He eventually became a lawyer, and we became 
friends. Our friendship was first cemented while spending hours 
photocopying form files in my office.
  We then served in the Virginia House of Delegates together, where I 
knew him as someone who would often reach across party lines to get 
things accomplished for his fellow Virginians.
  In 2013, Onzlee helped then-Republican Governor Bob McDonnell pass 
his transportation plan.
  After leaving the House of Delegates, Onzlee was appointed as a 
judge, serving in juvenile and domestic relations court. It was there 
that he used what he learned earlier in life to reach out to juveniles, 
telling them they could turn their lives around and be successful, just 
as he had become.
  He later rose in the ranks to become a circuit court judge.
  Onzlee Ware was a trailblazer. He served as the first Black 
legislator from the western part of Virginia and later the first Black 
judge in Roanoke Circuit Court. He made an impact on so many throughout 
his life, his legacy will live on for years to come. He was my friend. 
I will miss him.
I rise today to pay tribute to 
the remarkable life and legacy of Mr. William Anthony Anderson, Sr., 
whose sudden passing on March 9, 2024, has deeply saddened our 
community. Mr. Andersons journey, characterized by dedication, 
service, and compassion, has left an indelible mark on all who had the 
privilege of knowing him.
  Born on July 12, 1962, in Blue Springs, Mr. Andersons commitment to 
public service was evident from the outset. He served at the Union 
County Sheriffs Office for over a decade before assuming the role of 
chief of police for the city of Verona, where his leadership and 
dedication earned him the respect of his colleagues and the community. 
Anderson was appointed as the assistant police chief at Northeast 
Mississippi Community College in late 2014. His commitment to the 
safety and well-being of the students led to his subsequent appointment 
as police chief on July 1, 2021, succeeding Chief Randy Baxter.
a pillar of support for the students, embodying the 
values of service and protection. His passion for ensuring the well-
being of the students was evident in his actions, from organizing car 
inspections to late-night safety walks.
  A man of faith, Mr. Anderson was a dedicated member of Ecru Second 
Baptist Church, where he served as a deacon, embodying his commitment 
to serving others both within and beyond the law enforcement community.
, dedication, and compassion will 
forever be cherished by those whose lives he touched. He leaves behind 
a community grateful for his unwavering commitment to duty and his 
enduring impact on the lives of many.
  Beyond his professional accomplishments, Mr. Anderson was a loving 
husband to his wife, Connie Smith Anderson, and a devoted father to 
their three children, Anna, Ebony, and William Jr., who followed in his 
fathers footsteps in law enforcement. He also cherished his role as a 
grandfather to Kydwn and Fallyn.
  May Chief Anthony Anderson rest in peace. His service and sacrifice 
will never be forgotten.
I rise today to honor the life of Robert 
``Bob Anderson Craighead, who passed away on February 9, 2024. He was 
97 years old.
18, 1926, in Hyattsville, 
Maryland, to William M. and Jean C. Craighead. He graduated from Andrew 
Lewis High School at age 16 and then began a 44-year career in 
railroads, as a messenger in the N&amp;Ws Blacksmith Shop.
  Not long after, Mr. Craigheads railroad career was put on hold when 
he volunteered for the U.S. Marine Corps during World War II, serving 
as a rifleman with the Fourth Marine Division and earning a Purple 
Heart after being wounded in the Battle of Iwo Jima. He also tried to 
volunteer for the Korean War when the war broke out, but because of his 
injuries, was turned down.
  After returning from World War II, he completed a four-year 
apprenticeship, and moved to the Industrial Development Department in 
1954, retiring in 1987 as Regional Manager.
  During his life he served as the President of the Salem/Roanoke 
County Chamber of Commerce, Chairman of the Salem Industrial 
Development Authority, Chairman of the Economic Development Committee 
of the Virginia State Chamber of Commerce, and he was a member of the 
Regional Partnership of the Roanoke Valley. He also served as director 
and Vice President of the Salem Educational Foundation and Alumni 
Association, establishing the Craighead Family Endowment, awarding 
scholarships to graduates of Salem High School.
  When I was a boy, growing up in a mother-led single parent household, 
I was included in 
activities with his boys.
  Following his retirement in 1987, Mr. Craighead wrote and published a 
book titled, ``Jacksons Legacy.
  He was preceded in death by his wife, Janet Terry Akers Craighead, 
his parents, and his two brothers, William M. Craighead, Jr. and James 
L. Craighead.
  He is survived by his five children and their significant others, 
Russell Craighead and Cynthia Miller, Anne Craighead, Steve and Beth 
Craighead, Nancy Craighead and Janet Ardam, Tim and Debra Craighead; 
adoptive daughter, Amanda Allen; nine grandchildren; and sixteen great-
grandchildren. I wish them my sincerest condolences during this 
difficult time.
  I want to thank Mr. Craighead for his service to our country and note 
that he was a valued member of the Salem community throughout his life.
and still I rise. I rise to honor 
the memory of a noble public servant Harris County Justice of the Peace 
Judge Armando V. Rodriguez. Elected to Harris Countys Precinct 6, 
Place 2 in 1973, Judge Armando V. Rodriguez became the first Hispanic 
to hold the title of Harris County Justice of the Peace. He served our 
county admirably for more than four decades and was known as the 
longest-tenured judge in Harris County.
  The Honorable Judge V. Rodriguez was not just a holder of public 
trust but a justice seeker, community leader, and coalition builder. 
Judge Rodriguez exercised compassion and experience to boldly advocate 
for and protect his community. Judge Rodriguez went above and beyond 
the call of duty when he founded Fiestas Patrias, an organization that 
celebrates the diversity and cultures of Latin America and culminated 
into an annual parade that is still being held today. Judge Rodriguezs 
efforts also included the creation of the Black and Brown Coalition, 
which we co-founded together.
, I am fortunate enough to say that I knew and worked 
alongside The Honorable Judge Armando V. Rodriguez for many years. I 
believe that when history records the legacy of Judge Rodriguez, he 
will be forever

remembered for his caring and candid demeanor as he worked to serve 
local communities, his county, as well as his country.
today, I introduce a bill that would permit 
commercial filmmaking and photography on the grounds of the U.S. 
Capitol Complex. Currently, such filmmaking and photography is only 
authorized in Union Square.
  In many countries, freedom of expression is limited, and while the 
January 6th insurrection was one of the greatest threats to American 
democracy in history, the Capitol and the United States remain beacons 
of democracy for the world. We should encourage commercial filmmaking 
and photography at the Capitol to share this symbol of democracy with 
the world. Movies and television shows that involve the Capitol should 
not have to go to other cities or use a fake building.
  This bill would allow commercial filmmaking and photography outside 
of the Capitol and Congressional office buildings by permit, so long as 
neither chamber is in session. The policy allowing commercial 
filmmaking and photography in Union Square shows that the Capitol 
Police can handle commercial filmmaking and photography at the Capitol 
Complex, especially when Congress is not in session. However, that 
vantage point captures the least familiar view of the Capitol. 
Preventing commercial filmmakers and photographers from shooting in 
front of the Capitol is neither business-friendly nor true to the 
nations democratic traditions. Encouraging commercial filmmaking and 
photography at the Capitol would help spread the story of democracy 
around the world.
  There is no good reason why commercial filmmaking and photography 
should be confined to Union Square. Specifically, my bill would give 
the Capitol Police complete discretion to issue a permit for commercial 
filmmaking and photography at the Capitol Complex under the same terms 
and conditions as those for commercial filmmaking and photography in 
Union Square. No policy or security reasons exist to justify limiting 
commercial filmmaking and photography at the Capitol Complex to Union 
Square, especially considering that permits are necessary. Visitors are 
regularly seen taking videos and pictures around the Capitol Complex, 
demonstrating the arbitrary nature of limiting commercial filmmaking 
and photography to Union Square.
  This bill would provide the Capitol Police authority to charge fees 
to cover any costs incurred by the Architect of the Capitol (AOC) for 
permit approval. The fees would be deposited into the Capitol Trust 
Account, which was established to accept fees collected from commercial 
filmmaking and photography permits for Union Square. Amounts in the 
Capitol Trust Account would be available without fiscal year limitation 
for maintenance, improvements and projects the AOC considers 
appropriate, subject to the approval of the Appropriations Committees.
  Views of the Capitol are among Americas most iconic. Limiting 
commercial filmmaking and photography of the Capitol, an important 
vehicle for telling the nations story, does not serve the American 
people. Indeed, most of the world reveres our system of government 
largely through commercial films and photos of the Capitol, a symbol of 
our democracy at work. Commercial films and photographs of the Capitol, 
the seat of our democracy, are perhaps the best modern vehicles for 
telling the nations story and showcasing its democratic system of 
government. Republicans and Democrats alike revere the image of the 
Capitol as a symbol of democracy. My bill would enable appropriate, 
permitted commercial filmmaking and photography of the Capitol, and 
would create economic benefits for the Nation, the District of Columbia 
and private businesses.
  I urge my colleagues to support this bill.
due to a personal family matter, 
I was unable to be in D.C. to vote on March 12, 2024. Had I been 
present, I would have voted ``Yea on Roll Call No. 84, and ``Yea on 
Roll Call No. 85.
RECOGNIZING CARSON ROSS ON HIS RETIREMENT AS BLUE SPRINGS MAYOR
it is with a deep sense of gratitude that I 
rise today to honor the lifelong public service career of Mr. Carson 
Ross, who has served as the mayor of the city of Blue Springs since 
2008. Mr. Ross will be retiring as the first African American Mayor of 
Blue Springs, Missouri. Mr. Rosss dedication to public service is 
truly exemplary.
  Before he began his distinguished career, Mr. Ross was a graduate of 
Bradley County High School, attended the University of Arkansas--Pline 
Bluff, and later received a Bachelor of Science in Business 
Administration from Rockhurst University in 1977. He began his career 
as a public servant in 1981, when he was elected to the Blue Springs 
Board of Aldermen where he served Districts 2 and 3 for eight 
consecutive years as Alderman and one year as Mayor Pro Tem. To further 
grow his expertise and leadership skills, he went on to serve on the 
Legislative Branch of the State of Missouri and was elected to the 
Missouri House of Representatives to represent the 55th District. Under 
this capacity, Mr. Ross served for a total of 14 years in Missouris 
House of Representatives and as a testament of his abilities as a 
leader, served as the Republican Whip in 1991 through 1992.
  As a result of his work ethic and dedication to serving his 
community, Mr. Ross was recognized as one of Kansas Citys most 
influential African Americans by the Kansas City Globe in 1995 and 
1996. Furthermore, his influence and impact did not go unnoticed when 
he received the Outstanding Legislator Award in 1996 by the Missouri 
Federation Grand Order of Pachyderms and the 1997 state award by the 
Kansas City Globe as the Most Influential African American.
  Beyond his role as a legislator, Mr Ross worked with Hallmark Cards 
after having an illustrious career of 39 years with the company, where 
he held various positions. Additionally, he has served the city of Blue 
Springs in various capacities outside of Mayor through his 
participation on various boards including as Chairman of the Blue 
Springs Personnel Board, President of St. Marys Medical Center Board 
of Associates, a founding member of Summit Bank of Kansas City Board of 
Trustees, among many more.
  As Mayor of Blue Springs for sixteen years, Mr. Ross focused on ways 
that he could better his community and his selfless spirit of service 
is displayed throughout his career. His historical achievement of 
becoming the citys first Black Mayor serves as an image of resiliency 
and determination to break through barriers and lay the groundwork for 
future leaders. As children look towards future careers and 
occupations, they will know that they too are capable of being Mayor 
and a public servant, even if that means being the first to do so.
, I ask my colleagues to join me today in recognizing Mr. 
Ross for his tremendous accomplishments, his commitment, and tireless 
community service. His immense impact will continue through the 
multitude of lives he has impacted. On behalf of Missouris Fifth 
Congressional District, I wish Mr. Ross great joy and relaxation in 
retirement as Mayor.
I rise today to recognize the Rotary Club 
of Plymouth, the oldest and largest service organization in Plymouth, 
Michigan. Rotary Club of Plymouths 100-year commitment to serving the 
local community is admirable and worthy of recognition.
  Founded in 1924 as a chapter of Rotary International, the club is a 
non-profit organization funded solely by fundraising events in the 
Plymouth area and charitable contributions from members of the club and 
those who support its mission of advancing local education, community, 
and worldwide efforts. The Plymouth chapter strives to help its members 
in their own journeys to advance community though understanding, 
goodwill, and peace through healthcare improvements, providing quality 
education, improving the environment, and alleviating poverty. In 1957, 
the Rotary Club of Plymouth established the Plymouth Rotary Foundation 
to invest its donations in service projects, and since its inception 
the foundation has invested more than $1.9 million in local education 
scholarships and community projects.
  Today, Rotary Club of Plymouth continues to hold annual events 
including barbeques, golf outings, and art fairs to raise the funds it 
needs to positively impact the local community. They raise over 
$100,000 every year to support local park projects, scholarships, food 
bank fulfillment, clean drinking water programs, and COVID vaccination 
check-ins. Additionally, the group sponsors an annual bingo competition 
with local shops and restaurants to encourage residents to shop and 
dine at small businesses as a way of growing the local community Recent 
fundraising is expected to result in over $50,000 in educational 
scholarships to be distributed this Spring to local high schoolers who 
overcame significant challenges to graduate high school to help them 
pursue higher education Their commitment to public service only 
continues to grow by teaching students to become the next generation of 
community leaders.
  Rotary Club of Plymouths work to build the local community, help 
small businesses grow, and instill a commitment to public service over 
the past 100 years is inspiring. They are a true example of community 
over self and dedication to the common good. I know that more success 
is to come, and I cannot wait to see all that they accomplish in the 
future.
it is with significant appreciation that I 
rise today to celebrate the distinguished career of Vicki Turnbow, who 
has served as the President of the Raytown Area Chamber of Commerce in 
Raytown, Missouri since 2007. As a volunteer, member of the Board of 
Directors, and staff member, Vicki has worked diligently to promote 
economic development in Raytown while holding numerous positions within 
the Raytown Chamber. I ask that we take a moment to reflect on Vickis 
abundant accomplishments and commitment to promoting economic growth as 
her retirement nears.
  Vickis role as President of the Raytown Chamber of Commerce requires 
the oversight and leadership of two non-profit organizations, the 
Raytown Chamber of Commerce Building Foundation and the Raytown Area 
Chamber of Commerce and Tourism. The former owns the land and building 
of the Raytown Chamber`s office, while the latter works to provide 
year-long benefits to members. Vickis diverse and robust skill set 
have set her up for success in this role, as she is tasked with 
managing advocacy, networking events, community engagement, business 
resources, and community resources and maintaining a balanced budget 
for the Raytown Chamber. Understanding the importance of collaboration, 
Vicki has been devoted to working alongside the City of Raytown to 
promote economic development in the area. She has also worked to 
continue developing relationships with other Chambers in the Kansas 
City metropolitan area, as well as with Jackson County and local school 
boards.
  The Raytown Chamber has immensely benefitted from Vickis leadership. 
Vicki created an annual strategic plan to provide direction for staff 
members as they navigate the committee and board approval process. She 
has worked to establish the Tourism sector with the Chamber, redesign 
the Chambers logo, and to partner with Jackson County for the Rock 
Island Shared Use Project. During times of economic hardship, Vickis 
dedication to the Raytown Chamber remained steadfast. The Chamber 
continued to meet their goals throughout the beginning of the 2020 
Covid-19 pandemic due to her direction as President. Vicki also 
selflessly ran the Chambers office as a one-person operation from 
November of 2019 until April of 2023. Under Vickis leadership, the 
Capital Campaign was launched to remodel the Raytown Chamber of 
Commerce building. Vicki saw this project through to completion from 
2016 and 2023. I was honored to help secure the $200,000 needed through 
federal grants for a project so deserving of these funds.
  Vickis compassion for and generosity towards the people of Raytown 
extends even beyond her role as President of the Raytown Chamber of 
Commerce. She serves on the Board of trustees for the Raytown 
Educational Foundation and is a member of the Raytown Rotary Club. 
Vickis devotion to giving back to her community is apparent to all 
those around her. She has received numerous awards recognizing her hard 
work, including the Volunteer of the Year for the Raytown Chamber 
award, Raytowns Outstanding Woman Leader of the Year award, and the 
Raytown Citizen of the Year award. Vicki has also completed the Raytown 
Community Emergency Response Team training. Dedicating hours to serving 
her city, Vicki has demonstrated her passion for public service.
, please join me in applauding Vicki Turnbow as a thank 
you for leading the Raytown Chamber of Commerce as President and 
charitably serving her community. Her enthusiasm for improving the 
lives of others has earned her a joyous retirement. On behalf of 
Missouris Fifth Congressional District, I want to thank Vicki for her 
leadership on behalf of the 118th Congress.
I include in the Record the following 
Proclamation recognizing Virginia Allen and the Black Angels.
  Whereas: Virginia Allen arrived to Staten Island, New York at the age 
of 16 to work as a nurse at Staten Island Sea View Hospital in 1947.
  Whereas: Staten Island Sea View Hospital opened in 1913 specifically 
to treat patients with Tuberculosis and, at its peak, Sea View Hospital 
saw nearly 2,000 patients and was one of only four municipal hospitals 
in New York City that did not discriminate against Black nurses.
  Whereas: Virginia Allen received her training at Staten Island 
Seaview Hospital and courageously stepped up on the frontlines to be 
one of the 300 `Black Angels to treat tuberculosis patients.
  Whereas: the Black Angels were courageous, dedicated, and bold in 
answering the call to come to Sea View and risk their lives caring for 
the grievously sick and ``indigent consumptives of New York City, who 
had been banished to this woefully understaffed sanatorium.
  Whereas: Virginia Allen served for 10 years at Staten Islands Sea 
View Hospital, working in the pediatric ward. The Black Angels years 
of expertise played a significant role in the first ever human trials 
of isoniazid, the first drug to cure tuberculosis. Since its discovery 
in 1952, tens of millions of lives have been saved.
  Whereas: The Black Angels were activists and active members of the 
NAACP, neighborhood churches, and community groups, and became founding 
members of the Lincoln Hospital Alumni Association, the Urban League 
Guild, and the Womens Civic and Political Union. They were fierce 
advocates for the integration of Black nurses into the U.S. military 
and American Nurses Association, and in New York City they worked 
toward desegregating the hospital system.
  Whereas: Virginia Allen continued to serve her community as President 
of the North Shore Staten Island section of the National Council of 
Negro Women.
  Whereas: The people of Staten Island are grateful for the years of 
service by Virginia Allen and all the Black Angels who selflessly 
served on the front lines at Sea View Hospital to treat tuberculosis 
patients.
. Certainly, we can agree that federal agencies, like many large 
employers, need to reevaluate their office space requirements in 
response to more hybrid work options post-COVID.
  But this is not a new endeavor for the federal government. This is 
something the federal government was doing for more than a decade 
before the pandemic.

  When we passed the Telework Enhancement Act in 2009, federal telework 
participation was below 14 percent. By 2016, that number grew by more 
than 50 percent to 22 percent. During that intervening period, agencies 
created hoteling options, reevaluated office space needs, and even 
identified telework savings associated with reduced real estate 
requirements.
  So again, this is not new territory for the federal government. What 
is new is the mindless and punitive approach Republicans have started 
to take towards agency decisions about workplace environments.
  During the pandemic, Republicans on the Committee on Oversight and 
Accountability, voted to require 100 percent of federal employees back 
into the office for full-time in-person work--a standard that did not 
exist even before the pandemic and one that envisions a 19th century 
workplace complete with hole-punched timecards.
  Concurrently, they opposed my legislation, the Chai Suthammanont 
Remembrance Act, to implement common sense workplace public health 
standards to protect federal employees during COVID and any future 
public health emergencies.
  Their opposition is, as I said, mindless and punitive.
  With this bill, House Republicans are at it again. This bill would 
establish an arbitrary requirement for agencies to dispose of property 
and leases.
  It makes no accommodations for the workplace flexibility our federal 
agencies need, not just to compete for talent, but also to accommodate 
those with disabilities or military spouses whose employment would not 
be possible without hybrid or remote work.
  This bill demagogues the issue of hybrid work at a time when we 
should be taking meaningful action to help the federal workplace remain 
competitive and productive.
  I welcome the Administrations efforts to end pandemic era remote 
work postures while strengthening robust telework options for federal 
employees, which we helped create with the Telework Enhancement Act.
  There is a way forward that helps agencies adjust to post-pandemic 
workforce needs, but this bill is not the solution and I urge my 
colleagues to oppose it.
I rise today to pay tribute to an 
exemplary public servant, Wendy Motta, who has dedicated her career to 
serving the constituents of the 24th Congressional District with 
unwavering commitment and tireless effort. As we bid farewell to Wendy, 
we reflect on her distinguished service and the indelible mark she 
leaves on our community.
  Wendy Mottas journey in public service spans decades, including 
previously serving in the office of my predecessor, Congresswoman Lois 
Capps. Throughout her tenure as Senior District Representative, Wendy 
demonstrated an exceptional ability to address the diverse needs of our 
constituents, tackling crucial issues ranging from agriculture and 
veterans affairs to infrastructure and environmental stewardship. Her 
tireless efforts have made a lasting impact on the lives of those she 
helped.
  One of Wendys most remarkable contributions was her dedicated work 
in responding to natural disasters and emergencies. Her leadership 
during those challenging times provided solace and support to our 
community, showcasing her resilience and dedication to the well-being 
of the people she served. Wendys proactive approach and swift response 
in times of crisis set a standard of excellence for public service in 
our district.
  Beyond her professional accomplishments, Wendy Motta is the epitome 
of a devoted family person. Married to Silvio Motta, she has been a 
loving partner and a source of strength for her family. Wendy and 
Silvio have been blessed with two wonderful children, Caio and Carina, 
who undoubtedly have been inspired

by their mothers commitment to public service.
  Prior to her service with Congress, Wendy Motta served the California 
State Legislature in the 18th Senatorial District office. Her 
experience and expertise from the state level were instrumental in 
navigating the complexities of multi-jurisdictional issues and 
implementing effective policies for the benefit of our shared 
constituents on the Central Coast of California.
  As we express our gratitude for Wendys years of service, we also 
extend our best wishes for a fulfilling and joyous retirement. The 24th 
Congressional District has been fortunate to have such a dedicated 
advocate, and Wendys legacy will undoubtedly endure as an inspiration 
for future generations of public servants.
  In closing, I ask you to join me in acknowledging Wendy Mottas 
selfless contributions to the well-being of our community and express 
our deepest appreciation for her years of dedicated service. May her 
retirement be filled with the same warmth and kindness she has bestowed 
upon us throughout her illustrious career.