I rise today to recognize Lieutenant Amy 
Burton of Paris, Texas, and award her a Congressional Veteran 
Commendation. Lieutenant Burton honorably served in the United States 
Navy during the Afghanistan War.
  Lieutenant Burton heeded the call of duty to serve her nation after 
narrowly avoiding a terrorist attack in Spain that claimed the lives of 
several American servicemembers. Shortly after this tragedy, she 
enlisted in the Navy. From 1988 to 2012, Lieutenant Burton provided 
dental services and training to troops. Her duties took her around the 
world, including Sheppard Air Force Base, Camp Stone, Afghanistan, and 
Yokosuka, Japan. In 2007, Lieutenant Burton served onboard the USS 
Bonhomme Richard assault ship as the Medical Administration Officer. 
Her efforts helped ensure the troops under her supervision received 
adequate dental and medical care. For her outstanding service, 
Lieutenant Burton was bestowed several Navy and Marine Corps 
Commendation Medals, multiple Navy and Marine Corps Achievement Medals, 
and many more awards.
  Following her retirement in 2012, Lieutenant Burton has continued to 
make a tremendous impact in her community in numerous ways. She worked 
with her local Department of Veteran Affairs to aid homeless veterans, 
assist in benefits claims, and provide important workforce training. 
Lieutenant Burton also volunteers with Disabled American Veterans, 
American Legion, Veterans of Foreign Wars, and the Red River Valley 
Veterans Memorial to uplift and support those who made sacrifices in 
defense of our Nation.
  Through her remarkable leadership and compassion for those in need, I 
am confident that Lieutenant Burton has improved the lives of many 
veterans. I commend her for going the extra mile so that our men and 
women in uniform will never be overlooked.
  I am honored to represent Lieutenant Burton in Texas 4th 
Congressional District. It is a pleasure to award her the Congressional 
Veteran Commendation for her service to our Nation and to the people of 
North Texas.
I rise today to recognize Petty Officer 
First Class Charles Russo of Rockwall, Texas, and award him a 
Congressional Veteran Commendation. PO1 Russo honorably served in the 
United States Navy during the Gulf War and Global War on Terrorism.
  PO1 Russo has always been drawn to a career in public service. He 
began his Navy career in 1990 onboard the USS Wisconsin battleship and 
the USS Papago ocean tug before advancing to the Naval Criminal 
Investigative Service (NCIS). Here, PO1 Russo worked as an Intelligence 
Specialist and Special Security Officer with a focus in 
counterterrorism. Eventually, he was selected to serve as an Anti-
Terrorism Force Protection Officer. PO1 Russos work helped to 
strengthen and expand our intelligence communitys efforts to 
investigate terrorism. For his exceptional service, PO1 Russo was 
awarded multiple Navy and Marine Corps Achievement Medals, the Armed 
Forces Service Medal with ``M device, and many others.
  After his discharge in 2000, PO1 Russo was compelled to return to 
public service after the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks on our 
Nation. As a Navy Reservist, he was mobilized to assist in constructing 
secure rooms capable of handling sensitive information. He also had the 
opportunity to brief the Joint Chiefs of Staff on matters related to 
the Afghanistan War. For many years after being discharged, PO1 Russo 
has continued to serve our nation in various capacities. After some 
time in defense contracting, he became an FBI Intelligence Analyst. In 
this role, he investigates white-collar crime, researches terrorist 
explosive devices, and fills intelligence gaps where they are needed. I 
commend PO1 Russos lifelong efforts to safeguard our national security 
and protect those who cannot defend themselves. His selfless service 
has been nothing short of outstanding.
  I am honored to represent PO1 Russo in Texas 4th Congressional 
District. It is a pleasure to award him the Congressional Veteran 
Commendation for his service to our Nation and to the people of North 
Texas.
I rise today to recognize Sergeant Blaine 
Klein of Josephine, Texas, and award him a Congressional Veteran 
Commendation. Sergeant Klein honorably served in the United States Army 
during the Iraq War.
  At the age of 18, Sergeant Klein followed his fathers footsteps and 
enlisted in the Army in defense of our nation. His duties took him 
across the continental U.S., and later to Iraq and Korea. In Iraq, 
Sergeant Klein served as a Human Intelligence Collector and managed 
teams of intelligence sources to strengthen the Armys informational 
capabilities throughout the region. In one instance, he saved the lives 
of his teammates who were involved in a rollover accident that put all 
of their lives at risk. Sergeant Klein prioritized others around him 
and helped bring them to safety at great personal risk. For his 
distinguished service, he was bestowed the Army Commendation Medal, the 
Meritorious Unit Commendation, and many more awards.
  After returning to civilian life, Sergeant Klein has continued to 
positively influence his community while overcoming his service-related 
disabilities. He is no stranger to helping others. On a number of 
occasions, Sergeant Klein has stopped to assist those involved in 
vehicle accidents or medical emergencies. I commend him for continuing 
to be an upstanding role model for his community and family.
  I am honored to represent Sergeant Klein in Texas 4th Congressional 
District. It is a pleasure to award him the Congressional Veteran 
Commendation for his service to our Nation and to the people of North 
Texas.
I rise today to honor Michael D. Cole upon 
his retirement from the United States Department of State after 22 
years of service.
  Mike embarked on his foreign service journey in 2001. Since then, his 
service has extended from Los Angeles and Washington, D.C. to U.S. 
Embassies and Consulates in Abuja, Bangkok, Budapest, Mumbai, San 
Salvador, and Vienna.
  Mike assumed the role of Director of the Los Angeles Passport Agency 
in September 2020, facing head-on the arduous challenges and travel 
restrictions necessitated by the COVID-19 pandemic. As international 
travel has resumed in the years since, Mikes leadership in Los Angeles 
was critical in the agencys return to pre-pandemic productivity, 
processing passports for nearly three-quarters of a million U.S. 
citizens during his time as Director. In this position, Mike was a 
reliable, affable, and professional partner to my District Office as 
caseworkers processed passport casework brought to them by my 
constituents. Mike and his team provided prompt and satisfactory 
guidance in navigating these often tricky and changing requests.
  Mikes dedication to public service is further exemplified by his 
service in the Consular Corps, where he has utilized his experience and 
expertise to mentor the next generation of Consular Officers. His work 
to assist U.S. citizens during crises, offer support in disaster 
relief, aid bereaved families, and protect vulnerable children stand as 
a testament to his commitment to the American people domestically and 
abroad.
  I extend my heartfelt thanks to Mike for his service to our 
constituents of the 39th Congressional District and our country, and I 
wish him a well-deserved retirement.
I rise today in opposition to Amendment 109 
which imposes a cap of 30 percent of the total grant on all facilities 
and administrative, or F&amp;A, costs for research awards made by the 
National Institutes of Health.
  F&amp;A costs help keep the lights on at research facilities across the 
country. These costs are essential reimbursements for operational 
expenses incurred by universities and other research institutions for 
conducting research on behalf of the government. This amendment would 
greatly affect the ability of research institutions to operate cutting-
edge laboratories and maintain utilities such as heating or hazardous 
waste disposal.
  This amendment would reduce critical scientific research that 
directly contributes to our ability to save lives and reducing 
suffering for the communities we serve. Most medical breakthroughs were 
federally supported and took place at medical schools, teaching 
hospitals, and other research institutions across the country. Without 
the federal governments reimbursement of F&amp;A costs, institutions would 
be forced to scale back research that may help develop the next vaccine 
or cure for cancer, Alzheimers, and other health threats, or the next 
technological innovation that will create new businesses or medical 
devices.
  As a result of these cuts, Americans will have to wait longer for 
cures and our country will cede scientific breakthroughs to foreign 
competitors such as China, which is heavily investing in this space. 
This would undermine our nations economic competitiveness and erode 
the United States longstanding commitment to medical research that has 
yielded countless benefits to society and our well-being.
  In summary, cutting essential F&amp;A costs for scientific research would 
result in slower scientific progress, longer waits for cures, fewer 
jobs, and a threat to our nations economic competitiveness. I urge my 
colleagues to join me in opposing this amendment.
on November 6, I missed two recorded votes. 
Had I been present, on Roll Call No. 599, the motion to suspend the 
rules and pass H.R. 1607, I would have voted Yea. On Roll Call No. 600, 
the motion to suspend the rules and pass H.R. 359, I would have voted 
Yea. On November 9, I missed two recorded votes. Had I been present, on 
Roll Call No. 641, agreeing to Tenney Amendment No. 100, I would have 
voted No. On Roll Call No. 642, agreeing to Tenney Amendment No. 101, I 
would have voted No.
RECOGNIZING RON SAPPS 24 YEARS OF SERVICE TO THE CITY OF FERNANDINA 
                                 BEACH
I rise today to honor Mayor Ron 
Sapp for his decades of dedication and service to Fernandina Beach. 
Mayor Sapps 24 years of civic service as Mayor, Vice Mayor, and 
Commissioner spanned four decades and displayed an unwavering 
commitment to bettering our hometown of Fernandina Beach. I was proud 
to serve alongside him on the Commission, as did my father.
  Fernandina is proud of Ron Sapp not only because of his dedication to 
his community, but also for his military service as an Air Force 
veteran. But no true biography of Ron would be complete without a 
chapter on Mr. Sapp--the teacher. Mr. Sapp didnt just teach students 
what to think, he taught them how to think, and that is something 
special. Generations of Pirates developed an in interest in--and love 
for--public service--and for that inspiration, we are grateful.

  Mayor Ron Sapp sought to preserve the spirit of Fernandina Beach as a 
small island town and is a better place because of his accomplishments. 
Ron, of course, has done all these things with his wife Kasey by his 
side, and with the support of his daughters Sherri and Lori, and the 
love of his grandchildren.
  On November 14, one of Mayor Sapps greatest achievements is being 
named after him: The Ron Sapp Egans Creek Greenway. Mayor Sapps 
introduction of the Open Space Bond issue secured the funding for this 
greenway, which will leave this land untouched by development to be 
enjoyed by all.
  I ask my colleagues to join me today in recognizing Mayor Ron Sapp 
for his significant role in shaping Fernandina Beach into the beautiful 
town it is today.