Title IV of Senate Resolution 4, agreed to by the Senate of February 
4, 1977, calls for establishment of a system for a computerized 
schedule of all meetings and hearings of Senate committees, 
subcommittees, joint committees, and committees of conference. This 
title requires all such committees to notify the Office of the Senate 
Daily Digest--designated by the Rules Committee--of the time, place and 
purpose of the meetings, when scheduled and any cancellations or 
changes in the meetings as they occur.
  As an additional procedure along with the computerization of this 
information, the Office of the Senate Daily Digest will prepare this 
information for printing in the Extensions of Remarks section of the 
Congressional Record on Monday and Wednesday of each week.
  Meetings scheduled for Tuesday, April 9, 2024 may be found in the 
Daily Digest of todays Record.

                                APRIL 10
     9:30 a.m.
       Committee on Armed Services
         To hold open and closed hearings to examine the posture 
           of United States Special Operations Command and United 
           States Cyber Command in review of the Defense 
           Authorization Request for fiscal year 2025 and the 
           Future Years Defense Program; to be immediately 
           followed by a closed session in SVC-217.
                                                            SD-106
     10 a.m.
       Committee on Appropriations
       Subcommittee on Interior, Environment, and Related Agencies
         To hold hearings to examine proposed budget estimates and 
           justification for fiscal year 2025 for the U.S. Forest 
           Service.
                                                            SD-124
       Committee on the Budget
         To hold hearings to examine offshore tax evasion by the 
           wealthy and corporations.
                                                            SD-608
       Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation
         To hold hearings to examine the nominations of Jennifer 
           L. Homendy, of Virginia, to be Chairman of the National 
           Transportation Safety Board, and Patrick John Fuchs, of 
           Wisconsin, to be a Member of the Surface Transportation 
           Board.
                                                            SR-253
       Committee on Environment and Public Works
         To hold hearings to examine the state of air quality 
           monitoring technology.
                                                            SD-406
       Committee on Foreign Relations
         To hold hearings to examine the Presidents proposed 
           budget request for fiscal year 2025 for United States 
           Agency for International Development.
                                                            SD-419
       Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
         Business meeting to consider S. 4042, to amend title 44, 
           United States Code, to reform the management of Federal 
           records, S. 2871, to advance Federal Government 
           innovation through the implementation and use of multi-
           cloud computing software technology, S. 4036, to 
           establish a Government Spending Oversight Committee 
           within the Council of the Inspectors General on 
           Integrity and Efficiency, S. 4062, to establish a pilot 
           program to assess the use of technology to speed up and 
           enhance the cargo inspection process at land ports of 
           entry along the border, S. 4066, to improve Federal 
           technology procurement, S. 3698, to amend title 11, 
           District of Columbia Official Code, to revise 
           references in such title to individuals with 
           intellectual disabilities, S. 4055, to provide for a 
           pilot program to improve contracting outcomes, S. 2278, 
           to establish Image Adjudicator and Supervisory Image 
           Adjudicator positions in the U.S. Customs and Border 
           Protection Office of Field Operations, S. 4024, to 
           amend the Homeland Security Act of 2002 to enable 
           secure and trustworthy technology through other 
           transaction contracting authority, S. 1897, to require 
           the Secretary of Homeland Security to enhance 
           capabilities for outbound inspections at the southern 
           land border, S. 3851, to designate the facility of the 
           United States Postal Service located at 90 McCamly 
           Street South in Battle Creek, Michigan, as the 
           ``Sojourner Truth Post Office, H.R. 5473, to amend 
           certain laws relating to disaster recovery and relief 
           with respect to the implementation of building codes, 
           H.R. 2754, to designate the facility of the United 
           States Postal Service located at 2395 East Del Mar 
           Boulevard in Laredo, Texas, as the ``Lance Corporal 
           David Lee Espinoza, Lance Corporal Juan Rodrigo 
           Rodriguez &amp; Sergeant Roberto Arizola Jr. Post Office 
           Building, H.R. 3865, to designate the facility of the 
           United States Postal Service located at 101 South 8th 
           Street in Lebanon, Pennsylvania, as the ``Lieutenant 
           William D. Lebo Post Office Building, and H.R. 3947, 
           to designate the facility of the United States Postal 
           Service located at 859 North State Road 21 in Melrose, 
           Florida, as the ``Pamela Jane Rock Post Office 
           Building.
                                                            SD-342
       Committee on the Judiciary
         To hold an oversight hearing to examine the Community 
           Oriented Policing Services (COPS) grant program.
                                                            SD-G50
     2:30 p.m.
       Committee on Appropriations
       Subcommittee on Homeland Security
         To hold hearings to examine proposed budget estimates and 
           justification for fiscal year 2025 for the Department 
           of Homeland Security.
                                                            SD-192
       Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs
       Subcommittee on Economic Policy
         To hold hearings to examine MOHELAs performance as a 
           student loan servicer.
                                                            SD-538
       Committee on Energy and Natural Resources
       Subcommittee on Water and Power
         To hold hearings to examine the federal and non-federal 
           role of assessing cyber threats to and vulnerabilities 
           of critical water infrastructure in our energy sector.
                                                            SD-366
       Committee on Small Business and Entrepreneurship
         To hold hearings to examine the role of child care small 
           businesses in supporting parents and the American 
           workforce.
                                                           SR-428A
       Select Committee on Intelligence
         To receive a closed briefing on certain intelligence 
           matters.
                                                            SH-219
       Joint Economic Committee
         To hold hearings to examine investing in early childhood 
           education.
                                                            SH-216
     3 p.m.
       Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
       Subcommittee on Emerging Threats and Spending Oversight
         To hold hearings to examine improving export controls and 
           enforcement.
                                                            SD-342
     3:30 p.m.
       Committee on Veterans Affairs
         To hold hearings to examine ensuring equity for women 
           veterans at the VA.
                                                            SR-418

                                APRIL 11
     8 a.m.
       Committee on Armed Services
         To hold open and closed hearings to examine the posture 
           of United States European Command and United States 
           Transportation Command in review of the Defense 
           Authorization Request for fiscal year 2025 and the 
           Future Years Defense Program; to be immediately 
           followed by a closed session at 12:30 p.m. in SVC-217.
                                                            SH-216
     9:30 a.m.
       Committee on Foreign Relations
       Subcommittee on Western Hemisphere, Transnational Crime, 
           Civilian Security, Democracy, Human Rights, and Global 
           Womens Issues
         To hold hearings to examine countering transnational 
           criminal networks and corruption in the Western 
           Hemisphere.
                                                            SD-419
     9:45 a.m.
       Committee on the Judiciary
         Business meeting to consider the nominations of Sanket 
           Jayshukh Bulsara, to be United States District Judge 
           for the Eastern District of New York, Dena M. Coggins, 
           to be United States District Judge for the Eastern 
           District of California, Eric C. Schulte, and Camela C. 
           Theeler, both to be a United States District Judge for 
           the District of South

           Dakota, Nancy L. Maldonado, of Illinois, to be United 
           States Circuit Judge for the Seventh Circuit, Georgia 
           N. Alexakis, to be United States District Judge for the 
           Northern District of Illinois, Krissa M. Lanham, and 
           Angela M. Martinez, both to be a United States District 
           Judge for the District of Arizona, Sparkle L. 
           Sooknanan, to be United States District Judge for the 
           District of Columbia, Claria Horn Boom, of Kentucky, 
           and John Gleeson, of New York, both to be a Member of 
           the United States Sentencing Commission, and David O. 
           Barnett, Jr., to be United States Marshal for the 
           District of New Mexico, Clinton J. Fuchs, to be United 
           States Marshal for the District of Maryland, Matthew L. 
           Gannon, to be United States Attorney for the Northern 
           District of Iowa, David C. Waterman, to be United 
           States Attorney for the Southern District of Iowa, and 
           Gary D. Grimes, Sr., to be United States Marshal for 
           the Western District of Arkansas, all of the Department 
           of Justice.
                                                            SD-G50
     10 a.m.
       Committee on Finance
         To hold hearings to examine bolstering chronic care 
           through Medicare Physician Payment.
                                                            SD-215

                                APRIL 16
     10 a.m.
       Committee on Foreign Relations
         Business meeting to consider S. 1651, to encourage 
           increased trade and investment between the United 
           States and the countries in the Western Balkans, S. 
           138, to amend the Tibetan Policy Act of 2002 to modify 
           certain provisions of that Act, S. 1829, to impose 
           sanctions with respect to persons engaged in the import 
           of petroleum from the Islamic Republic of Iran, S. 
           3874, to impose sanctions with respect to foreign 
           support for terrorist organizations in Gaza and the 
           West Bank, S. 2626, to impose sanctions with respect to 
           the Supreme Leader of Iran and the President of Iran 
           and their respective offices for human rights abuses 
           and support for terrorism, S. 2336, to address the 
           threat from the development of Irans ballistic missile 
           program and the transfer or deployment of Iranian 
           missiles and related goods and technology, including 
           materials and equipment, S. Res. 505, condemning the 
           use of sexual violence and rape as a weapon of war by 
           the terrorist group Hamas against the people of Israel, 
           S. Res. 357, recognizing the formation of the Alliance 
           for Development in Democracy and urging the United 
           States to pursue deeper ties with its member countries, 
           S. Res. 385, calling for the immediate release of Evan 
           Gershkovich, a United States citizen and journalist, 
           who was wrongfully detained by the Government of the 
           Russian Federation in March 2023, S. Con. Res. 18, 
           calling for the immediate release of Marc Fogel, a 
           United States citizen and teacher, who was given an 
           unjust and disproportionate criminal sentence by the 
           Government of the Russian Federation in June 2022, and 
           the nominations of Stephanie Sanders Sullivan, of 
           Maryland, to be Representative of the United States of 
           America to the African Union, with the rank and status 
           of Ambassador, Pamela M. Tremont, of Virginia, to be 
           Ambassador to the Republic of Zimbabwe, Elizabeth Rood, 
           of Pennsylvania, to be Ambassador to Turkmenistan, 
           Richard H. Riley IV, of California, to be Ambassador to 
           the Federal Republic of Somalia, David J. Kostelancik, 
           of Illinois, to be Ambassador to the Republic of 
           Albania, Kamala Shirin Lakhdhir, of Connecticut, to be 
           Ambassador to the Republic of Indonesia, Stephan A. 
           Lang, of Virginia, to be U.S. Coordinator for 
           International Communications and Information Policy, 
           with the rank of Ambassador, Jennifer M. Adams, of 
           Virginia, to be Ambassador to the Republic of Cabo 
           Verde, Courtney Diesel ODonnell, of California, to be 
           United States Permanent Representative to the United 
           Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural 
           Organization, with the rank of Ambassador, Dorothy 
           Camille Shea, of North Carolina, to be Deputy 
           Representative of the United States of America to the 
           United Nations, with the rank and status of Ambassador 
           and the Deputy Representative of the United States of 
           America in the Security Council of the United Nations, 
           and to be Representative of the United States of 
           America to the Sessions of the General Assembly of the 
           United Nations, during her tenure of service as Deputy 
           Representative of the United States of America to the 
           United Nations, Dafna Hochman Rand, of Maryland, to be 
           Assistant Secretary for Democracy, Human Rights, and 
           Labor, Arthur W. Brown, of Pennsylvania, to be 
           Ambassador to the Republic of Ecuador, Richard Mills, 
           Jr., of Georgia, to be Ambassador to the Federal 
           Republic of Nigeria, and Mark Toner, of Pennsylvania, 
           to be Ambassador to the Republic of Liberia, all of the 
           Department of State, Andrew William Plitt, of Maryland, 
           to be an Assistant Administrator of the United States 
           Agency for International Development, Richard L.A. 
           Weiner, of the District of Columbia, to be United 
           States Director of the European Bank for Reconstruction 
           and Development, Elizabeth Shortino, of the District of 
           Columbia, to be United States Executive Director of the 
           International Monetary Fund, routine lists in the 
           Foreign Service, and other pending calendar business.
                                                             S-116

                                APRIL 17
     10 a.m.
       Committee on Foreign Relations
         To hold hearings to examine modernizing United States 
           alliances and partnerships in the Indo-Pacific.
                                                            SD-419