I am pleased that the House took 
decisive action today to reauthorize the Federal Aviation 
Administration--or FAA--by advancing H.R. 3935, the Securing Growth and 
Robust Leadership in American Aviation Act. Upon enactment, this 
critically-important legislation will better protect the health and 
safety of air travelers, improve conditions for both the current and 
future aviation workforce, and make significant investments in our 
Nations aviation infrastructure and air traffic control technologies.
  I am proud to have cast my vote in favor of H.R. 3935. This long-
overdue, bipartisan measure will modernize Americas aviation system, 
advance consumer safety and protections, and prepare the next 
generation of highly qualified and diverse aviation professionals.
  For years, I have advocated for enhanced federal funding to better 
recruit, retain, and advance underrepresented populations in the 
aviation industry. To that end, I applaud the bills inclusion of $60 
million in annual funding to the FAA to bolster the pool of pilots, 
aviation maintenance professionals, and manufacturing workers in the 
talent pipeline. Of the $60 million provided, H.R. 3935 requires that 
20 percent of this annual funding be designated for the Willa Brown 
Aviation Program, which introduces and trains underserved communities 
in various aviation careers. I thank my colleague, Rep. Hank Johnson, 
for his leadership on this provision. Im also pleased to see that the 
reauthorization bill directs the FAA to engage and partner with 
Historically Black Colleges and Universities and Minority Serving 
Institutions to advance awareness of aviation-related education 
programs and careers, a recommendation I made in my testimony before 
the Transportation and Infrastructure Committee.
  The bills historic investment in our countrys airports with, $4 
billion in annual funding for the Airport Improvement Program, will 
help modernize public-use airports, such as Midway and OHare airports 
in Chicago, while simultaneously spurring economic growth and 
employment opportunities for many Chicagoland residents and businesses. 
I praise the host of policy reforms and robust protections for air 
travelers and consumers, like the Section 503 requirement that airlines 
refund passengers on significantly delayed or cancelled flights and a 
new mandate that airlines permit passengers to sit next to their young 
child when practical and at no cost. Inclusion of these important and 
long-overdue consumer protections in the FAA reauthorization bill 
further explains why the measure enjoys such widespread bi-partisan 
support in Congress and beyond.
  I commend House Transportation and Infrastructure Committee Chairman 
Graves and Ranking Member Larsen for their hard work to deliver this 
comprehensive and bicameral bill to reauthorize the FAA, helping ensure 
that the U.S. remains a global leader in aviation safety and 
innovation.
I rise today to honor a significant 
milestone in the agricultural community of Ballico, California--the 
centennial anniversary of the Cortez Growers Association. Established 
on April 18, 1924, by four visionary Japanese immigrants, the Cortez 
Growers Association began as a small cooperative endeavor to market 
fruits and vegetables effectively despite language barriers. The 
founders employed a bilingual agent, ensuring their enterprises early 
success and sustainability.
  The association thrived, even through the Great Depression, expanding 
its membership and operational capacity. By 1932, twenty-six additional 
members had joined, and Cortez Growers Association appointed its first 
full-time manager. However, the outbreak of World War II and the 
subsequent internment of Japanese Americans dealt a severe blow to the 
association. All members, being of Japanese descent, were either 
interned or enlisted in the military, many serving in the highly 
decorated 442nd Regimental Combat Team.
  Despite these adversities, the Cortez Growers Associations land was 
preserved through trust and leased to neighboring farmers, allowing the 
association to regain its footing post-war. The resilience and 
determination of the members during these trying times are a testament 
to their commitment to their community and country.
  In the ensuing decades, the Cortez Growers Association has continued 
to adapt and thrive. Transitioning from a diverse crop base to focusing 
solely on almond production, the association has stayed at the 
forefront of agricultural innovation and efficiency. Today, the Cortez 
Growers Association is a leader in the almond industry and a pillar in 
agricultural advocacy, helping to found the Almond Alliance.
  As we commemorate a century of enduring legacy, the Cortez Growers 
Association is a beacon of community resilience, adaptability, and 
success. The values of faith, family, and dedication to future 
generations are as alive today as they were a hundred years ago.
  With great pride, I recognize the Cortez Growers Association for its 
century of service to the agricultural community and the nation. I want 
to extend my heartfelt congratulations to the Cortez Growers 
Association for 100 years of service and offer my sincerest wishes for 
their future.
I rise in opposition to H.R. 7109, the 
Equal Representation Act.
  H.R. 7109 would mandate that the decennial Census include a 
citizenship question, and that the apportionment of U.S. 
Representatives be based solely on a count of American citizens. This 
is yet another attempt by House Republicans to advance their anti-
immigrant political agenda by sabotaging the Census, which is required 
by the U.S. Constitution.

This bill would deliberately undermine the Censuss ability to reach 
chronically undercounted populations. The resulting impact would be to 
make future Censuses more costly and lead to inaccurate data that will 
have wide-ranging implications for Minnesota and our nation.
  Accurate Census data is necessary for determining the number of U.S. 
House of Representatives seats and Electoral College votes allocated to 
each state, as well as the share of trillions of dollars in federal 
funding each state receives. For Minnesota, an inaccurate count could 
result in the loss of representation in Congress and less federal 
funding for essential services, causing unnecessary harm to our 
communities. This bill threatens the accuracy of the Census and 
diminishes public trust. It would lead to manipulation of election maps 
and the hindering of the fair allocation of federal resources.
  I will always fight for an accurate Census that is consistent with 
our American values, and I will always work to ensure Minnesotans 
receives the federal funding, representation in Congress, and electoral 
votes they deserve.
I rise today to honor Mary Ellen Chavez, as 
the Parade Marshal for the Town of Planadas 2024 Community Day Parade.
  The daughter of migrant farm workers, Mary Ellen was born in Brawley, 
California and is a proud graduate of Le Grand High School (LGHS). 
While an LGHS student, and eventual Manzanita Queen, she was encouraged 
by her peers to go to college. Eventually Mary Ellen became the first 
high school and college graduate in her family. She earned her Bachelor 
of Arts degree from the College of the Holy Names, an all-womens 
Catholic college in Oakland, on a full academic scholarship. Then she 
completed a teaching credential at Fresno State University.
  At age 21, Mary Ellen began a 55-year long career as a catechist, 
teaching three generations of Planada children how to love the Lord. A 
parishioner of Planadas Sacred Heart Catholic Church for over 80 
years, Mary Ellen (and her family) regularly volunteered to help clean 
the church. She was also a regular reader, eucharistic minister, and 
choir singer, as well as a founding member of the English rosary group. 
Around Planada, she spent the rest of her hours cooking the best chile 
verde, coaching softball, helping her husband run the Planada 
Recreation Program, or attending baseball and softball games all over 
the area, where you could hear her distinctive two-fingered, 
celebratory whistle from a mile away.
  Mary Ellen taught in Fresno, Merced and Kern counties during her 
teaching career. In 1999, she was named the Vineland School District 
Educator of the Year while teaching an innovative curriculum on the 
Dust Bowl Days at Sunset Middle School near Lamont. She retired from 
teaching in 2000, having already served several terms on the Le Grand 
Union High School District Board of Trustees from 1978 to 1991. After 
her retirement, she was appointed to the Merced County Board of 
Education and served from 2005 to 2014.
  Mary Ellen and her husband, John, married in 1963, and while dancing 
weekends at every wedding, church event or fundraiser, produced eight 
children plus one walk-on. Those eight gave them 20 grandchildren, who 
have so far produced 26 great-grandchildren. Nothing pleases Mary Ellen 
and John more than to be surrounded by the chaos of their big family.
  I ask my colleagues to join me in recognizing Mary Ellen as the 
Parade Marshal for the Town of Planadas 2024 Community Day Parade.
due to flight delays, I was unable to 
vote on May 14, 2024. Had I been present, I would have voted YEA on 
Roll Call No. 196.
I rise today to recognize Adahlya 
Atencio-Muniz for earning the Arvada Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors 
for Youth Award.
  Adahlya has overcome many challenges along her journey to success, 
demonstrating perseverance at every step. Students who strive to make 
the most of their education, like Adahlya, develop crucial skills and a 
work ethic that will guide them for the rest of their lives. This award 
is a testament to Adahlyas hard work, determination, and perseverance 
at Oberon Middle School and is clearly just the beginning of a bright 
and promising future.
  It is my honor to congratulate Adahlya Atencio-Muniz on achieving the 
Arvada Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth Award.
I rise today to recognize Bodhi McBean 
for earning the Arvada Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth Award.
  Bodhi has overcome many challenges along his journey to success, 
demonstrating perseverance at every step. Students who strive to make 
the most of their education, like Bodhi, develop crucial skills and a 
work ethic that will guide them for the rest of their lives. This award 
is a testament to Bodhis hard work, determination, and perseverance at 
Oberon Middle School and is clearly just the beginning of a bright and 
promising future.
  It is my honor to congratulate Bodhi McBean on achieving the Arvada 
Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth Award.
I rise today to honor Faria Land and Cattle 
as they are awarded the 63rd Annual Farmers of the Year award by the 
Kiwanis Club of Tulare. The Faria Cousins--Steve, Rick, Mike, and Danny 
Jr.--were born into a family of farmers in Tulare. From early on in 
their lives they learned their craft from their fathers, Manuel Faria 
Jr. and Danny Faria Sr., who like them, learned from his father--Manuel 
Faria Sr.
  Like many family farms in the Central Valley, Faria Land and Cattle 
was founded by Manuel Sr. after he immigrated to the U.S. from the 
Azores Islands of Portugal in 1920. The Cousins are the third 
generation of Faria farmers, carrying on the family business that has 
stood for more than a century in the Central Valley. Today, the Faria 
Cousins work together to manage the daily operations of the farm and 
dairy facilities.
  Faria Land and Cattle produces a variety of commodities including 
wheat, oats, alfalfa, and almonds, and operates two dairies, as well as 
a custom calf ranch operation. Their commitment to providing high-
quality products and services to the Central Valley community has been 
unwavering for more than 100 years.
  In addition to their dedication to the family business, the Faria 
cousins are active members of the Tulare community, having volunteered 
on several boards of organizations that help to serve the local 
agricultural community. As the recipient of this years award, the 
Faria Cousins are being recognized for their commitment to Central 
Valley agriculture and dedication to giving back to the community. The 
success of Faria Land and Cattle is a true testament to the Faria 
familys hard work and perseverance. I am confident that their work 
will continue to strengthen the Tulare agricultural community for 
generations to come.
, I ask my colleagues in the House of Representatives to 
join me in celebrating Faria Land and Cattle as they are awarded the 
63rd Annual Farmers of the Year Award.
I rise today to recognize Lilly 
Louderback for earning the Arvada Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for 
Youth Award.
  Lilly has overcome many challenges along her journey to success, 
demonstrating perseverance at every step. Students who strive to make 
the most of their education, like Lilly, develop crucial skills and a 
work ethic that will guide them for the rest of their lives. This award 
is a testament to Lillys hard work, determination, and perseverance at 
Oberon Middle School and is clearly just the beginning of a bright and 
promising future.
  It is my honor to congratulate Lilly Louderback on achieving the 
Arvada Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth Award.
I rise today to recognize the service and 
sacrifice of Berrien County Sheriff Deputy Elton C. Stover. Deputy 
Stover was born November 21, 1910, in Berrien County and pursued a 
career in law enforcement, serving in the Berrien Springs Police 
Department, Comstock Police Department, and served as the Constable of 
Lincoln Township.
  On December 3, 1965, armed gunmen targeted the Farmers &amp; Merchants 
National Bank in Benton Township. Berrien County Sheriff Deputies Elton 
Stover and Gary Mitchell responded to the call for help. Upon arrival 
to the scene, Deputies Stover and Mitchell were immediately met with an 
array of gunfire with both men being struck.
  As Deputy Stover laid on the bank floor he was hit with two bullets, 
smashing through his chest and right leg. He and Deputy Mitchell were 
rushed to Mercy Hospital in Benton Harbor, where he underwent what was 
thought to be a successful surgery. Unfortunately, Deputy Stovers 
condition deteriorated, and he passed away during surgery at 2.55 p.m. 
on December 10, 1965, making the ultimate sacrifice in service to the 
people of Berrien County. To this day, Deputy Elton C. Stover remains 
the only Deputy in the history of the Benton County Sheriffs 
Department to be killed in the line of duty.
, each day, law enforcement officials like Deputy Stover 
help to keep our communities safe, rush into dangerous situations, and 
lay down their lives to protect their fellow citizens. It is my solemn 
honor to remember Deputy Elton Stover and all fallen law enforcement 
officers from Michigans 4th Congressional District, the state, and 
throughout the country.
Title IV of Senate Resolution 4, agreed to by the Senate of February 
4, 1977, calls for establishment of a system for a computerized 
schedule of all meetings and hearings of Senate committees, 
subcommittees, joint committees, and committees of conference. This 
title requires all such committees to notify the Office of the Senate 
Daily Digest--designated by the Rules Committee--of the time, place and 
purpose of the meetings, when scheduled and any cancellations or 
changes in the meetings as they occur.
  As an additional procedure along with the computerization of this 
information, the Office of the Senate Daily Digest will prepare this 
information for printing in the Extensions of Remarks section of the 
Congressional Record on Monday and Wednesday of each week.
  Meetings scheduled for Thursday, May 16, 2024 may be found in the 
Daily Digest of todays Record.

                                 MAY 21
     9:30 a.m.
       Committee on Armed Services
       Subcommittee on Strategic Forces
         To hold hearings to examine Department of Defense space 
           activities in review of the Defense Authorization 
           Request for Fiscal Year 2025 and the Future Years 
           Defense Program.
                                                            SR-222
     10 a.m.
       Committee on Appropriations
       Subcommittee on Defense
         To hold hearings to examine proposed budget estimates and 
           justification for fiscal year 2025 for the Army.
                                                            SD-192
       Committee on Energy and Natural Resources
         To hold hearings to examine the opportunities, risks, and 
           challenges associated with growth in demand for 
           electric power in the United States.
                                                            SD-366
       Committee on Finance
         To hold hearings to examine child savings accounts and 
           other tax-advantaged accounts benefiting American 
           children.
                                                            SD-215
       Committee on the Judiciary
         To hold hearings to examine competition in the 
           prescription drug market, focusing on ensuring 
           affordable and accessible medications.
                                                            SD-G50
     10:30 a.m.
       Committee on Foreign Relations
         To hold hearings to examine the Presidents proposed 
           budget request for fiscal year 2025 for the Department 
           of State, focusing on American diplomacy and global 
           leadership.
                                                            SD-419
     2:30 p.m.
       Committee on Appropriations
       Subcommittee on State, Foreign Operations, and Related 
           Programs
         To hold hearings to examine proposed budget estimates and 
           justification for fiscal year 2025 for the Department 
           of State.
                                                            SD-138
       Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation
       Subcommittee on Surface Transportation, Maritime, Freight, 
           and Ports
         To hold hearings to examine the roadway safety crisis and 
           highlighting community solutions.
                                                            SR-253
       Committee on Finance
       Subcommittee on International Trade, Customs, and Global 
           Competitiveness
         To hold hearings to examine trade enforcement and entry 
           of merchandise at U.S. ports.
                                                            SD-215
       Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions
       Subcommittee on Primary Health and Retirement Security
         To hold hearings to examine feeding a healthier America, 
           focusing on current efforts and potential opportunities 
           for Food is Medicine.
                                                            SD-430
       Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
       Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations
         To hold hearings to examine fraud and Zelle.
                                                            SD-342
       Committee on the Judiciary
       Subcommittee on Criminal Justice and Counterterrorism
         To hold hearings to examine forced labor in prisons.
                                                            SD-226

                                 MAY 22
     Time to be announced
       Committee on Small Business and Entrepreneurship
         Business meeting to consider S. 3772, to amend the Small 
           Business Act to require that plain writing statements 
           regarding the solicitation of subcontractors be 
           included in certain subcontracting plans, S. 3971, to 
           amend the Small Business Act to require reporting on 
           additional information with respect to small business 
           concerns owned and controlled by women, qualified 
           HUBZone small business concerns, and small business 
           concerns owned and controlled by veterans, S. 4341, to 
           require plain language and the inclusion of key words 
           in covered notices that are clear, concise, and 
           accessible to small business concerns, and an original 
           bill entitled, ``The STEP Modernization Act of 2024.
                                                               TBA
     10 a.m.
       Committee on Appropriations
       Subcommittee on Energy and Water Development
         To hold hearings to examine proposed budget estimates and 
           justification for fiscal year 2025 for the Department 
           of Energy, including the National Nuclear Security 
           Administration.
                                                            SD-192
       Committee on the Budget
         To hold hearings to examine water scarcity in a changing 
           climate.
                                                            SD-608
       Committee on Environment and Public Works
         To hold hearings to examine Federal programs for the 
           circular economy, focusing on state and local 
           perspectives on efforts to improve reuse and recycling.
                                                            SD-406
       Committee on Finance
         To hold hearings to examine the Family First Prevention 
           Services Act, focusing on successes, roadblocks, and 
           opportunities for improvement.
                                                            SD-215
       Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
         To hold hearings to examine restoring Congressional 
           oversight over emergency powers, focusing on exploring 
           options to reform the National Emergencies Act.
                                                            SD-342
       Committee on the Judiciary
         To hold hearings to examine pending nominations.
                                                            SD-226
     11:45 a.m.
       Joint Congressional Committee on Inaugural Ceremonies--2024
         Organizational business meeting to designate the Chair, 
           designate the 2025 Inaugural site, approve the 
           Inaugural budget, and designate official staff 
           representatives.
                                                             S-219
     2:30 p.m.
       Committee on Appropriations
       Subcommittee on Legislative Branch
         To hold hearings to examine proposed budget estimates and 
           justification for fiscal year 2025 for the Sergeant at 
           Arms and Doorkeeper of the Senate and the United States 
           Capitol Police.
                                                            SD-124
       Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs
       Subcommittee on Economic Policy
         To hold hearings to examine protecting consumers 
           pocketbooks, focusing on lowering food prices and 
           combatting corporate price gouging and consolidation.
                                                            SD-538
       Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions
       Subcommittee on Employment and Workplace Safety
         To hold hearings to examine new standards and practices 
           in mining, focusing on health and safety.
                                                            SD-430
       Committee on Indian Affairs
         To hold an oversight hearing to examine public safety and 
           justice resources in Native communities.
                                                            SD-628
     4:45 p.m.
       Committee on Armed Services
       Subcommittee on Strategic Forces
         To hold hearings to examine the Department of Energys 
           atomic energy defense activities and Department of 
           Defense nuclear weapons programs in review of the 
           Defense Authorization Request for Fiscal Year 2025 and 
           the Future Years Defense Program.
                                                            SR-222
                                JUNE 12
     10 a.m.
       Committee on Environment and Public Works
         To hold hearings to examine the Presidents proposed 
           budget request for fiscal year 2025 for the Fish and 
           Wildlife Service.
                                                            SD-406
the Assistance to Fire Grants (AFG) and 
Staffing for Adequate Fire and Emergency Response (SAFER) grants 
provide essential resources to fire departments around the country. 
Since their authorization in 2000, these grant programs have provided 
more than $15 billion in funding nationwide to community fire 
departments, ensuring that they are prepared for whatever challenges 
they might face. It is essential Congress fund these programs as local 
governments often lack the resources to invest in new firefighting 
equipment and to cover the costs of hiring and training new 
firefighters.
  I voted in support of the House Amendment to S. 870, the Fire Grants 
and Safety Act of 2023 because we must continue to deliver these vital 
funds to our communities. However, I am disappointed that House 
Republicans amended this legislation to add an unrelated bill, S. 
1111--the Accelerating Deployment of Versatile, Advanced Nuclear for 
Clean Energy (ADVANCE) Act. The reauthorization of the AFG and SAFER 
grants should not have been packaged with a bill to accelerate nuclear 
energy deployment, which is a complex issue that deserves its own 
debate and vote. I would have preferred to vote on these two unrelated 
issues separately.
  I will continue to support our local fire departments and ensure that 
they have access to the federal resources they need to keep our 
communities safe.