I rise today to commemorate the 100th birthday 
of the Kerrville Veterans Affairs Medical Center in my district. This 
beautiful campus serves veterans from across multiple counties in the 
Texas Hill Country.
  The Benevolent War Risk Society and the American Legion recognized 
the need for medical care of World War I veterans. Countless veterans 
contracted tuberculosis during and after that conflict. Fundraising for 
the hospital began in 1919. The generous Schreiner family of Kerrville 
donated over 700 acres of land for the hospital grounds. Unfortunately, 
funding ran out in early 1921. The American Legion came to the 
projects rescue and eventually donated the hospital to the State of 
Texas.
  As a result, the name ``American Legion Memorial Sanatorium was 
bequeathed on the facility. The first patients were admitted on June 
22, 1921. The federal Veterans Administration began to lease the 
hospital from the State of Texas two years later. The facility became 
the 93rd veteran hospital to open in the United States on July 12, 
1923, under the name ``Veterans Administration Hospital at Kerrville. 
There were a total of 15 buildings on campus at the time, some of which 
are still used today.
  President Herbert Hoover created the Veterans Administration in July 
1930, changing the name of the hospital yet again. Over the years, 
efforts were made to expand. A two million-dollar project in 1947 
resulted in 400 additional beds and a total of 8 hospital floors. 
January of 1960 saw the conversion of the facility to full general 
medical services.
  On March 15, 1995, the South Texas Veterans Healthcare System was 
created when the Kerrville VA Medical Center merged with the Audie L. 
Murphy Memorial Hospital in San Antonio.
  Over the years, the Veterans Administration donated most of the 
original land to various local entities. The current footprint of the 
Kerrville VA Medical Center is 70 acres, including a Veterans National 
Cemetery. My constituents will gather on April 12, 2024 to recognize 
the significant contributions of this medical facility to Texas 
veterans.
I rise today to recognize my friend and 
an esteemed leader in Contra Costa County, John Coleman, as he retires 
from the East Bay Municipal Utility District (EBMUD) Board of Directors 
after 33 years of dedicated service and is honored as the Lafayette 
Citizen of the Year.
  Throughout his career, John has been instrumental in shaping vital 
water policy in our state, forging increased collaboration between a 
variety of California water agencies, working to protect the East Bays 
water supply, and guiding the agency through multiple state-wide 
droughts. John was first elected to EBMUDs board in 1990 representing 
the communities of Alamo, Lafayette, Walnut Creek, Danville, Pleasant 
Hill, and San Ramon. John played a key role in the founding of the 
Freeport Regional Water Authority (FRWA), an agency tasked with guiding 
the financing, ownership, construction, and operations of the Freeport 
Regional Water Project. John is also the longest-serving board member 
in EBMUDs history.
  Prior to his work with EBMUD, John served as President of the 
Association of California Water Agencies (ACWA) and the California 
Association of Sanitation Agencies (CASA). He also was President of the 
Lafayette Chamber Board and spearheaded the creation of the annual 
Lafayette Reservoir Run for Education. John has been a strong supporter 
of youth in our community, having served as Scoutmaster of Boy Scout 
Troop 243 in Lafayette for more than 20 years and later going on to 
serve as an Eagle Advisor.
  We are grateful for Johns continued dedication to our community and 
wish him luck at his new post in the Calaveras County Water District. 
Please join me in honoring and congratulating John Coleman as he 
retires after more than three decades of devoted service with EBMUD.
I would like to include in the Record a letter 
which my lead Democratic cosponsor, Mr. Costa, and I received from the 
U.S. Travel Association expressing the support of the travel industry 
for the passage of the Passport System Reform and Backlog Prevention 
Act:

                                                   March 18, 2024.
     Hon. Darrell Issa,
     House of Representatives,
     Washington, DC.
     Hon. Jim Costa,
     House of Representatives,
     Washington, DC.
       Dear Representatives Issa and Costa: On behalf of the U.S. 
     Travel Association (U.S. Travel), which represents all 
     segments of Americas travel industry, I am writing to 
     express our strong support for H.R. 6610, the Passport System 
     Reform and Backlog Prevention Act, which is a bipartisan 
     measure that calls for the modernization of the State 
     Departments passport processing capabilities. H.R. 6610 
     provides a much-needed framework for meeting the Departments 
     commitment to improve efficiency, security, and customer 
     experience within the passport application process.
       As you know, Americas travel industry plays a vital role 
     in our Nations economy, contributing significantly to 
     revenue generation and job creation across all 50 states and 
     territories. U.S. Travels mission is to increase travel to 
     and within the United States, and H.R. 6610 aligns with that 
     mission. As the travel sector continues to recover from the 
     pandemic, there is an urgent need to modernize that travel 
     experience, improve travel IT infrastructure, and position 
     the Department to meet increased demand for passports. In 
     2022 and 2023, the Department received a record-breaking 
     number of passport applications driven by the surge in U.S. 
     traveler demand for international trips, thereby causing a 
     massive and persistent backlog in average processing times.
       While there has been modest improvement in passport 
     processing times since last summer, more needs to be done to 
     bring about sustained progress. Significant improvements in 
     both passport and visa processing times can be readily 
     achieved through the long-overdue modernization of the Bureau 
     of Consular Affairs outdated IT systems. The legacy systems 
     relied upon by Consular Affairs have significantly hindered 
     the agencys ability to keep pace with demand and disrupted 
     the travel experiences of millions of Americans each year. 
     Accordingly, the modernization of IT infrastructure should be 
     treated as a critical priority for delivering streamlined 
     customer experience for passport and visa applicants, while 
     ensuring the accuracy and security of those functions.
       This modernization initiative also aligns with broader 
     efforts to promote international travel and strengthen 
     diplomatic relations. As the world becomes increasingly 
     interconnected, it is essential for the United States to 
     maintain a robust and efficient passport system that 
     facilitates the movement of people and fosters a travel 
     sector that drives economic growth and job creation.
       The U.S. Travel Association commends your bipartisan 
     leadership in introducing H.R. 6610 and looks forward to 
     working alongside you to advocate for its passage.
           Sincerely,

                                         Executive Vice President,
     Public Affairs and Policy.
having been born and raised in Vallejo, 
California and graduating from California State University, East Bay, 
Cheryl is a true Bay Area native. With a focus on the local news 
impacting my constituents most, Cheryl covered a wide range of stories, 
from community events to breaking news. Her reporting showcased her 
dedication to providing accurate and impactful journalism to her 
viewers.
  Her love for covering breaking news was known to anyone who crossed 
her path. Cheryl was the first to report about the BALCO steroid 
scandal that rocked the sports world. By shedding a light on the banned 
performance-enhancing substances, Cheryl was able to hold corporations 
accountable and protect the integrity of our athletics. I truly admire 
the tenacity she showed to always follow through on her stories.
  Like many journalists in California, Cheryl was tasked with covering 
natural disasters such as wildfires and earthquakes that devastated 
entire communities. Im thankful for the compassion she showed to the 
victims of those events as well as her work to raise awareness of the 
increasing risks posed by disasters including the flooding, wildfires, 
heatwaves, and drought Californians now face every year.
  Over her 20-year legacy, Cheryl was honored with an award from the 
Bay Area Black Journalist Association and four Emmy awards presented by 
the National Academy of Television Arts and Sciences San Francisco. Im 
so proud that her years of experience and commitment were met with 
accolades and applause.
  Aside from her time in broadcast, Cheryl is also one of the founding 
members of Friends of Faith, a non-profit organization founded 1987, 
that raises money for women diagnosed with breast cancer in the East 
Bay. After realizing the financial hardships that East Bay cancer 
patients are burdened with, Cheryl, along with her peers, began 
fundraising to provide stipends for women in need of financial 
assistance during their treatment journey. This is just one of the many 
ways Cheryl cared for her neighbors.
  Cheryls professionalism and selflessness has made our community a 
better place. Now that she has more time, I hope Cheryl is able to 
enjoy more time with her family and adorable dog, Stripe. Im 
privileged to call her a friend, and I wish her a joyful retirement. It 
surely is well-deserved.
today I rise to honor a Hoosier whose 
service to country and community has endured for over three decades. 
Lisa Wilken is a former airman and advocate who has dedicated her 
career to uplifting her fellow veterans.
  Lisas service began in the United States Air Force and continues 
today through her work with veteran service organizations as a fierce 
advocate for veteran-friendly legislation at both the Indiana 
Statehouse and the United States Congress.
  As an active member of multiple veteran organizations, Lisa has 
advocated for veterans at every stage. Far too often the assistance 
veterans require post-service is not accessible, or just nonexistent. 
Lisas experience in the Air Force enabled her to become an advocate 
for lifechanging legislation at the Indiana Statehouse, including 
securing tax exemptions for disabled veterans, Veteran Service Officer 
accreditation, tuition coverage and free programs for dependents of 
disabled veterans, and the creation of the State Women Veteran 
Coordinator position at the Indiana Department of Veteran Affairs.
  Lisa has prioritized recognizing and serving overlooked 
constituencies in the military community, especially women veterans. 
She testified before Congress to raise awareness for the lack of 
funding for military sexual trauma veterans. In 2017, she was honored 
by the State of Indiana with the Torchbearer Award, and in 2023, she 
was inducted into the Indiana Military Veterans Hall of Fame. Lisa 
Wilken has established a legacy in the Indianapolis and surrounding 
communities that will be felt and deeply appreciated for future 
generations of service women and men.
  Even within the veteran community, women veterans tend to be 
overlooked and underrecognized. That is why I am proud to honor the 
many Hoosier women veterans who selflessly serve our community. 
Beginning with its namesake, the Sheila Corcoran Hoosier Women Hero 
Award was created to highlight exemplary Hoosier women veterans whose 
service to their community and Nation is unparalleled. I ask my 
colleagues to join me in recognizing Lisa Wilken. I thank Lisa for her 
service and for her advocacy as she continues to be a voice of her 
peers, for her persistence, and for her commitment to the veteran 
community.