I rise today to commemorate the life of a 
fellow patriot and beloved editor of the Republican Briefs, Mrs. 
Florence ``Frosty Taylor.
  Two weeks ago, Arizona lost a dear friend. With two beautiful 
children, two grandchildren, three great-grandchildren, and a husband 
of 68 years, Frosty lived a life full of love, service, and passion for 
adventure. She would never lie idle when there was more work to be done 
for our country.
  Born on April 7, 1937, Frosty grew up on her grandfathers cattle 
ranch in South Dakota and married her high school sweetheart. In 1964, 
she won the Mrs. Nebraska pageant and subsequently embarked on a career 
in public media. Beginning as a columnist, she quickly advanced to the 
position of editor and earned the titles of first female reporter to 
ride in a Phoenix Police helicopter and honorary Phoenix firefighter.
  After great success in the media industry, Frosty worked in the 
Arizona Attorney Generals office and the Arizona Game and Fish 
Department Heritage Fund.
  But Frostys true service was performed within her community. She 
served as President of the Wickenburg Republican Club and was one of 
her districts precinct committeewomen and state committeeman, while 
reporting Arizona news as editor of the Republican Briefs, a role from 
which she retired only this past August.
  She had a thirst for knowledge, but not for her own benefit. Whether 
it was working for the media or humbly publishing a 500-page family 
cookbook, Frosty strived to share all she learned with others.
  Every time we met, she amazed me. She knew politics through and 
through, from the local to the national level. If you visit the 
Republican Briefs website, you will find countless testimonies to 
Frostys advocacy on behalf of Arizonan Conservatives.
  On November 4, 2023, Frosty passed away at the vivacious age of 86. 
Although this is a time of mourning, her life and legacy will be 
celebrated for years to come.
  She will be remembered as a woman of principle, but most of all, a 
long-time supporter and friend of mine. When you have a friend in 
Frosty, you have a friend indeed.
HONORING THE RETIREMENT OF BRADLEY UNIVERSITYS MENS SOCCER HEAD COACH 
                               JIM DEROSE
I rise today to honor and congratulate Jim 
DeRose on his retirement as Bradley Universitys Mens Soccer Coach 
after 28 successful seasons.
  Beginning his career in 1996 at the age of 28 as the youngest coach 
in NCAA Division I mens soccer, Jim quickly emerged as a dominant 
figure in the soccer community. Jim guided the Braves to the regular-
season Missouri Valley Conference title in 1998, followed by the 
programs first NCAA Tournament appearance in 2000. Under Jims 
leadership, Bradleys soccer program reached new heights and resulted 
in a 2007 run to the NCAA Elite Eight, where Jim was chosen as the 
Soccer America National Coach of the Year.
  Jims record speaks volumes of his commitment and dedication to the 
game. During his tenure as head coach, Bradley held a 267-227-66 record 
with seven NCAA tournament appearances, the highest for any coach in 
Bradley University Athletics history. Jim finishes his career as the 
second-winningest coach in Missouri Valley Conference soccer history 
and coached the only four-year all-Americans in MVC mens soccer 
history.
  In addition to his accomplishments on the pitch, the accomplishments 
of his players in the classroom and post-graduation are a testament to 
his ability to grow his players into successful young men. Six former 
assistant coaches have gone on to become NCAA Division I head coaches, 
sixteen players have been selected for all-American academic awards, 
and nine have been selected in the Major League Soccer SuperDraft.
  Jim has been an integral part of growing the game of soccer 
throughout central Illinois and his legacy will last for years to come. 
It is my privilege to congratulate Jim DeRose on his retirement after 
28 years with Bradley University Mens Soccer and wish him, his wife 
Robin, and his two children, Raleigh and J.R., all the best.
I rise today to introduce the Business 
Uninterrupted Monetary Program Act of 2023 (BUMP Act). This crucial 
piece of legislation provides essential funding to businesses and 
nonprofits that have been directly and measurably fInancially impacted 
by major transportation projects, with the goal of keeping them 
solvent.
  With major transit and highway projects planned across the country, 
the livelihoods and survival of some local businesses may be at risk 
because of construction disruptions that impede customers access to 
their store fronts.

In my own district, on the heels of closures caused by the COVID 
pandemic, a major transit project prevented customers from accessing 
stores in downtown Santa Ana, CA for months. Many of those businesses 
struggled to pay their rent and utility bills, pay for their inventory, 
and some had to close permanently as a result. Efforts to help the 
businesses, such as signage, failed. What they needed were financial 
resources. What happened in my district can happen anywhere in America, 
in any downtown. We can and need to do more to minimize the economic 
damage inflicted on local businesses from projects that receive federal 
transportation monies.
  The legislation will require local sponsors to create a BUMP fund 
that provides financial assistance for local entities that will 
experience a measurable interruption causing negative financial impact 
from the project. The fund can cover utilities, insurance, rent or 
mortgage, payroll, loss of income, and any other expense that the 
sponsor determines is needed for the impacted businesses. Importantly, 
the local sponsors who know the local community and best understand the 
impacts of the project create and manage the BUMP fund. The local 
sponsor further determines how much to contribute to the fund, how the 
fund is structured, which entities are eligible for funding, and what 
type of expenses should be covered.
  The requirement to create a BUMP fund only applies to highway 
projects with a total cost equal or greater than $50 million and 
transit projects with a total cost equal or greater to $100 million 
with measurable negative financial impacts on local businesses and 
nonprofits. The bill also creates a one-time grant opportunity for 
businesses and nonprofits that are currently struggling financially 
from an interruption created by a major transportation project.
  It is important to Americas economy that local businesses can 
continue to serve our communities after completion of transportation 
projects. I am introducing this legislation to make sure no other 
business is forced to face financial turmoil or close due to an 
interruption caused by a major transportation project. I hope my 
colleagues will join me in supporting this crucial initiative, allowing 
our Nations vibrant local economies to stay afloat during the 
construction of major infrastructure projects and reap the benefits of 
these transit and highway projects upon their completion.
today, I introduce the District of Columbia 
National Guard Federal Employee Leave Fairness Act, which would 
prohibit the Department of Defense (DOD) from recouping pay from 
District of Columbia National Guard (DCNG) members who

are federal civilian employees or District of Columbia employees and 
took encampment leave. The DOD claims these employees were not entitled 
to encampment leave without a loss of pay. While I disagree with the 
DODs interpretation, I am introducing this bill to resolve this 
matter.
  Congress partially addressed this matter in the National Defense 
Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2022 (NDAA) by adopting my amendment 
that effectively prohibited the DOD from recouping pay for encampment 
leave taken by DCNG members after the enactment of the NDAA. That 
amendment, however, did not apply to encampment leave taken before the 
enactment of the NDAA because of budget rules.
  In 1899, Congress codified in the D.C. Code the original authority 
for entitlement to leave when federal civilian employees were mobilized 
by the DCNG. In 1968, that authority was moved into 5 U.S.C. Sec. 6323. 
In that same year, Congress authorized two additional leave 
entitlements in 5 U.S.C. Sec. 6323, as well as established a salary 
offset provision in 5 U.S.C. Sec. 5519 referencing those two additional 
leave entitlements. However, because the U.S. Code had not been updated 
to include the earlier DCNG authority, the U.S. Code contained a 
duplicate subsection, one referring to DCNG mobilizations and one to a 
general leave entitlement for the National Guard and Reserves.
  Based on this legislative drafting error, the DOD has sometimes 
attempted to apply a salary offset to DCNG members who are federal 
employees and took encampment leave, and the DOD has indicated it will 
do so again soon. The Government Accountability Office (GAO), has said 
that 5 U.S.C. Sec. 6323(c) was not intended to be subject to a salary 
offset under 5 U.S.C. Sec. 5519 and noted in 1990 that the ``[Office of 
Personnel Management] advised that it now believes that the salary 
offset provisions of 5 U.S.C. Sec. 5519 do not apply to D.C. National 
Guardsmen under the circumstances described in 5 U.S.C. Sec. 6323(c). 
However, the Office of Personnel Management once again believes that 
the salary offset provisions of 5 U.S.C. Sec. 5519 apply to 5 U.S.C. 
Sec. 6323(c).
  DCNG members sincerely believed that they were taking this leave 
correctly, they have relied on this money, the recoupment will cause 
financial hardships for current and former DCNG members and it was 
Congress intent that DCNG members were entitled to this leave without 
a salary offset.
  I urge my colleagues to support this bill.
I was unable to be present for the recorded 
votes on Roll Call numbers 559, 560, 561, 562, 563, and 564. Had I been 
present, I would have voted YEA on Roll Call No. 559; YEA on Roll Call 
No. 560; YEA on Roll Call No. 561; YEA on Roll Call No. 562; NAY on 
Roll Call No. 563; and YEA on Roll Call No. 564.
today I am pleased to recognize 
this years Catherine McAuley Distinguished Alumnae Honoree at Mount 
Mercy Academy, Meghan Crotty Quinn. For over a century, Mount Mercy 
Academy has been a beacon of light and an indispensable institution 
within our community. With a unique focus on academic excellence, 
womens leadership, and a commitment to building a just society, it is 
only proper to commend the alumni who have contributed to this much-
deserved reputation.
  A proud South Buffalo resident, Meghan and her husband Kevin Quinn 
are the proud parents of Kiera (Mount Mercy Academy, Class of 2027), 
son Rory and daughter Colleen. Meghan is the daughter of Anita Durkin 
Crotty (Mount Mercy Academy Class of 1963) and Patrick Crotty. Meghan 
is a business and community leader. She graduated from John Carroll 
University in 2007 and earned the title of Certified Public Accountant 
shortly thereafter. Meghans rise in the banking industry has been 
rapid; after a stint with M&amp;T Bank, she now serves as a Senior Vice 
President in the Commercial Banking division at HSBC Bank. She has 
twice been recognized by her peers as a top 100 performer in United 
States commercial banking and is a recipient of the Irish Echos 40 
Under 40 Award in 2021. Meanwhile, her professional success has been 
coupled with a steadfast commitment of paying it forward. Meghan is the 
Treasurer of South Buffalo Roots, a rising community organization 
responsible for organizing the very successful South Buffalo Porchfest, 
Music in the Park series and South Buffalo Irish Festival. This 
dedicated group of volunteers in turn supports an array of neighborhood 
organizations using a creative model of giving back to other charitable 
organizations including, the South Buffalo Community Table, Buffalo 
Irish Center, Buffalo Refuse, local sports and school organizations, 
11-Day Powerplay, Kids Escaping Drugs, and Feed the Front Line. 
Citizens like Meghan--those who are consumed with doing right by their 
neighbors--are what makes Buffalo so special. Her commitment to 
professional excellence and bettering the Western New York community 
make for an incredible endorsement of Mount Mercy Academy and its 
principles.
  The award recipients and honorees tonight for Mount Mercy Academys 
22nd Annual Dinner have exceeded the already rigorous standard for the 
members within this community. Mount Mercys values and commitment to 
service are steeped in decades of tradition, and Meghan Crotty Quinn 
continues to live these values in her career and relationships.
Title IV of Senate Resolution 4, agreed to by the Senate of February 
4, 1977, calls for establishment of a system for a computerized 
schedule of all meetings and hearings of Senate committees, 
subcommittees, joint committees, and committees of conference. This 
title requires all such committees to notify the Office of the Senate 
Daily Digest--designated by the Rules Committee--of the time, place and 
purpose of the meetings, when scheduled and any cancellations or 
changes in the meetings as they occur.
  As an additional procedure along with the computerization of this 
information, the Office of the Senate Daily Digest will prepare this 
information for printing in the Extensions of Remarks section of the 
Congressional Record on Monday and Wednesday of each week.
  Meetings scheduled for Tuesday, November 14, 2023 may be found in the 
Daily Digest of todays Record.

     10 a.m.
       Committee on Environment and Public Works
         To hold hearings to examine opportunities in industrial 
           decarbonization, focusing on delivering benefits for 
           the economy and the climate.
                                                            SD-406
       Committee on Foreign Relations
         To hold hearings to examine United States leadership on 
           artificial intelligence in an era of strategic 
           competition.
                                                            SD-419
       Committee on the Judiciary
         To hold hearings to examine pending nominations.
                                                            SD-226
     11 a.m.
       Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
         Business meeting to consider the nominations of Harry 
           Coker, Jr., of Kansas, to be National Cyber Director, 
           Jeff Rezmovic, of Maryland, to be Chief Financial 
           Officer, Department of Homeland Security, and Suzanne 
           Elizabeth Summerlin, of Florida, to be General Counsel 
           of the Federal Labor Relations Authority.
                                                            SD-562
     2:30 p.m.
       Committee on Indian Affairs
         Business meeting to consider S. 1898, to amend the 
           Northwestern New Mexico Rural Water Projects Act to 
           make improvements to that Act, and S. 2088, to direct 
           the Secretary of the Interior to complete all actions 
           necessary for certain land to be held in restricted fee 
           status by the Oglala Sioux Tribe and Cheyenne River 
           Sioux Tribe.
                                                            SD-628
       Committee on Small Business and Entrepreneurship
         To hold hearings to examine veteran entrepreneurship, 
           focusing on from service to small business success.
                                                           SR-428A
       Select Committee on Intelligence
         To receive a closed briefing on certain intelligence 
           matters.
                                                           SVC-217
       Joint Economic Committee
         To hold hearings to examine aging Americans and a waning 
           workforce, focusing on demographic drivers of our 
           deficit.
                                                         LHOB-1334
     3:30 p.m.
       Committee on Veterans Affairs
         To hold hearings to examine VAs Fourth Mission, focusing 
           on supporting our nations emergency preparedness and 
           response.
                                                            SR-418

     10 a.m.
       Committee on Energy and Natural Resources
         Business meeting to consider subcommittee assignments for 
           the 118th Congress, S. 461, to make certain irrigation 
           districts eligible for Pick-Sloan Missouri Basin 
           Program pumping power, S. 594, to require the Secretary 
           of Agriculture and the Secretary of the Interior to 
           prioritize the completion of the Continental Divide 
           National Scenic Trail, S. 636, to establish the Dolores 
           River National Conservation Area and the Dolores River 
           Special Management Area in the State of Colorado, to 
           protect private water rights in the State, S. 1118, to 
           establish the Open Access Evapotranspiration (OpenET) 
           Data Program, S. 1254, to designate and expand 
           wilderness areas in Olympic National Forest in the 
           State of Washington, and to designate certain rivers in 
           Olympic National Forest and Olympic National Park as 
           wild and scenic rivers, S. 1348, to redesignate land 
           within certain wilderness study areas in the State of 
           Wyoming, S. 1521, to amend the Federal Power Act to 
           modernize and improve the licensing of non-Federal 
           hydropower projects, S. 1634, to provide for the 
           designation of certain wilderness areas, recreation 
           management areas, and conservation areas in the State 
           of Colorado, S. 1662, to direct the Secretary of the 
           Interior to convey to the Midvale Irrigation District 
           the Pilot Butte Power Plant in the State of Wyoming, S. 
           1776, to provide for the protection of and investment 
           in certain Federal land in the State of California, S. 
           1889, to provide for the recognition of certain Alaska 
           Native communities and the settlement of certain claims 
           under the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act, S. 1890, 
           to provide for the establishment of a grazing 
           management program on Federal land in Malheur County, 
           Oregon, S. 1955, to amend the Central Utah Project 
           Completion Act to authorize expenditures for the 
           conduct of certain water conservation measures in the 
           Great Salt Lake basin, S. 2160, to amend the Omnibus 
           Public Land Management Act of 2009 to authorize certain 
           extraordinary operation and maintenance work for urban 
           canals of concern, S. 2169, to authorize the Secretary 
           of the Interior to carry out watershed pilots, S. 2247, 
           to reauthorize the Bureau of Reclamation to provide 
           cost-shared funding to implement the endangered and 
           threatened fish recovery programs for the Upper 
           Colorado and San Juan River Basins, S. 2581, to extend 
           the Secure Rural Schools and Community Self-
           Determination Act of 2000, S. 2615, to amend the Alaska 
           Native Claims Settlement Act to provide that Village 
           Corporations shall not be required to convey land in 
           trust to the State of Alaska for the establishment of 
           Municipal Corporations, S. 3033, to withdraw certain 
           Federal land in the Pecos Watershed area of the State 
           of New Mexico from mineral entry, S. 3036, to require 
           the Secretary of the Interior to convey to the State of 
           Utah certain Federal land under the administrative 
           jurisdiction of the Bureau of Land Management within 
           the boundaries of Camp Williams, Utah, S. 3044,

           to redesignate the Mount Evans Wilderness as the 
           ``Mount Blue Sky Wilderness, S. 3045, to provide for 
           the transfer of administrative jurisdiction over 
           certain Federal land in the State of California, and S. 
           3046, to make permanent the authority to collect 
           Shasta-Trinity National Forest marina fees.
                                                            SD-366
       Committee on Foreign Relations
         To hold hearings to examine the nominations of Jeffrey 
           Prescott, of the District of Columbia, to be U.S. 
           Representative to the United Nations Agencies for Food 
           and Agriculture, with the rank of Ambassador, Charlie 
           Crist, of Florida, to be Representative of the United 
           States of America on the Council of the International 
           Civil Aviation Organization, with the rank of 
           Ambassador, Cardell Kenneth Richardson, Sr., of 
           Virginia, to be Inspector General, Nicole Shampaine, of 
           California, for the rank of Ambassador during her 
           tenure of service as United States Representative to 
           the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical 
           Weapons, and Joann M. Lockard, of Virginia, to be 
           Ambassador to Burkina Faso, all of the Department of 
           State, and other pending nominations.
                                                            SD-419
       Committee on the Judiciary
         Business meeting to consider an authorization for 
           subpoenas relating to the Supreme Court ethics 
           investigation.
                                                            SH-216
       Special Committee on Aging
         To hold hearings to examine modern scams, focusing on how 
           scammers are using artificial intelligence and how we 
           can fight back.
                                                            SD-106