Title IV of Senate Resolution 4, agreed to by the Senate of February 
4, 1977, calls for establishment of a system for a computerized 
schedule of all meetings and hearings of Senate committees, 
subcommittees, joint committees, and committees of conference. This 
title requires all such committees to notify the Office of the Senate 
Daily Digest--designated by the Rules Committee--of the time, place and 
purpose of the meetings, when scheduled and any cancellations or 
changes in the meetings as they occur.
  As an additional procedure along with the computerization of this 
information, the Office of the Senate Daily Digest will prepare this 
information for printing in the Extensions of Remarks section of the 
Congressional Record on Monday and Wednesday of each week.
  Meetings scheduled for Thursday, October 23, 2025 may be found in the 
Daily Digest of todays Record.

     9:30 a.m.
       Committee on Armed Services
         To hold hearings to examine the nominations of Marc 
           Berkowitz, of Virginia, Joseph Jewell, of Indiana, and 
           James Caggy, of New York, each to be an Assistant 
           Secretary, and Brendan Rogers, of Connecticut, to be an 
           Assistant Secretary of the Navy, all of the Department 
           of Defense.
                                                            SD-G50
     10 a.m.
       Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation
       Subcommittee on Coast Guard, Maritime, and Fisheries
         To hold hearings to examine reviving commercial 
           shipbuilding.
                                                            SR-253
     10:15 a.m.
       Committee on the Judiciary
         To hold hearings to examine competition issues in the 
           seed and fertilizer industries.
                                                            SD-106
     2:30 p.m.
       Committee on the Judiciary
       Subcommittee on the Constitution
         To hold hearings to examine politically violent attacks, 
           focusing on a threat to our constitutional order.
                                                            SD-226

     9:30 a.m.
       Committee on Energy and Natural Resources
         To hold hearings to examine the Section 106 consultation 
           process under the National Historic Preservation Act.
                                                            SD-366
     10 a.m.
       Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation
         To hold hearings to examine Big Tech and silencing 
           Americans part 2.
                                                            SR-253
       Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions
         To hold hearings to examine the future of biotech, 
           focusing on maintaining U.S. competitiveness and 
           lifesaving cures to patients.
                                                            SD-430
     2 p.m.
       Committee on Indian Affairs
         To hold hearings to examine impacts of government 
           shutdowns and agency reductions in force on Native 
           communities.
                                                            SD-628
     3 p.m.
       Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry
         To hold hearings to examine the nominations of Mindy 
           Brashears, of Texas, to be Under Secretary for Food 
           Safety, Stella Herrell, of New Mexico, to be an 
           Assistant Secretary, and John Walk, of Virginia, to be 
           Inspector General, all of the Department of 
           Agriculture.
                                                            SD-106
     4 p.m.
       Committee on Veterans Affairs
         To hold hearings to examine putting veterans first, 
           focusing on the current VA disability system.
                                                            SD-G50

     9:30 a.m.
       Committee on Armed Services
         To hold hearings to examine the nomination of Vice 
           Admiral Richard A. Correll, USN, to be Admiral and 
           Commander, United States Strategic Command.
                                                            SD-G50

     2:30 p.m.
       Committee on Indian Affairs
         To hold hearings to examine S. 107, to amend the Lumbee 
           Act of 1956.
                                                            SD-628