I want to congratulate R.A.I.N. 
(Regional Aid for Interim Needs) on providing incredible service to the 
Bronx, and New York City, for 60 years. R.A.I.N. started from humble 
beginnings as a home attendant service for elderly individuals who were 
being discharged from hospitals, who also lacked proper home care. 
Since then, it has expanded into a multi-service agency providing many 
crucial services to those in need throughout the Bronx and Manhattan 
including senior centers, home delivered meals, case worker visits 
among other irreplaceable activities. They have also partnered with the 
Bob and Dolores Hope foundation to foster Cucina Dolores, a community 
based mobile meals program for homeless and hungry persons in the South 
Bronx.
  As we celebrate this momentous occasion, we also remember and pay 
homage to the life of Beatrice Castiglia-Catullo, affectionately known 
as Bea. Beatrice, who passed away in 2018, was the esteemed founder 
R.A.I.N. A nurse by training, she worked tirelessly for her patients 
and later on for those who benefited from R.A.I.N.s services. R.A.I.N. 
would not have reached this milestone without the decades long 
dedication and commitment from Beatrice and the rest of their 
outstanding team.
  In recent years R.A.I.N. has provided additional valuable programs 
and resources in the Bronx community. They have begun providing 
services to Alzheimer caregivers acknowledging the significant toll 
that the horrific disease has not only on those suffering from it but 
also those caring foi them as well. R.A.I.N. sponsors two housing 
facilities in the district where our seniors live comfortably and 
affordably. Finally, R.A.I.N. runs 17 centers across the borough where 
their critical work takes place.
  Thank you to President and CEO Dr. Anderson Torres for continuing 
Beatrices essential work in our community. Congratulations to every 
member of R.A.I.N. and thank you to them for their service. I look 
forward to another 60 years of R.A.I.N.s community service.
I rise today to honor and congratulate 
Shannon W. Swing on his retirement from the Federal Aviation 
Administration.
  Shannon faithfully served this institution for 32 years, first in 
Anchorage, Alaska, then in Salt Lake City, Utah and finally in Boise, 
Idaho. With his calm demeanor, Shannon quickly became a leader in the 
organization, training new employees and being a steadfast presence in 
the tower.
  His contributions to ensuring a safe airspace were invaluable to 
providing efficient and secure travel for passengers across the country 
and world. We thank Shannon for his dedication and congratulate him on 
his well-earned retirement.
I rise to honor John F. Welsh--a World War II 
combat veteran and American patriot who celebrates his 98th birthday on 
September 4th, 2024. John Welsh, better known as ``Jack, was born in 
Macon, Georgia and grew up along the Gulf Coast from New Orleans to 
Pensacola, Florida.
  Jack never had a doubt that he was called to serve. Upon graduating 
high school on June 6, 1944--the same day allied forces landed on the 
beaches of Normandy--Jack immediately spoke to his parents about 
enlisting in the United States Army.
  Having watched World War II progress through his high school years 
and on the front pages of the newspapers he himself delivered, Jack was 
elated that his parents agreed, and he entered basic training in the 
fall of 1944.
  By October, Jack had crossed the country and the Pacific Ocean to 
land in the Philippines, and upon completion of his mission there, 
served in the occupation of Japan.
  After his years of service, Jack was awarded the Asiatic Pacific 
Theater Campaign Ribbon with two Bronze Stars, the Good Conduct Medal, 
the Philippine Liberation Campaign Ribbon with one Bronze Star, the 
Army of Occupation Ribbon, the Victory Ribbon, and three Overseas 
Service Bars.
  After discharge, Jack enrolled in Duke Universitys Forestry school 
where he earned both a Bachelors and Masters Degree in Forestry. He 
also met the love of his life, Mary Ann Casimes, with whom he later 
married and raised a family.
  We thank Jack for his years of service and wish him a happy 98th 
birthday. God bless.
I rise today to honor the career 
and retirement of Channell Wilkins, President and CEO of O.C.E.A.N., 
Inc., and his commitment to bettering the lives of communities across 
New Jersey throughout his years of service.
  A public servant most of his life, Channell has worked at the 
Municipal, County and State levels before serving in the Federal 
government as the Associate Commissioner of the Office of Head Start at 
the Department of Health and Human Services. His principled work has 
always been driven by his innate goal to improve the communities in 
which he served. His desire to serve has also been borne out in finding 
new and innovative ways to solve problems--bettering communities here 
across the state.
  While at O.C.E.A.N., Inc. Channell was also active in many 
organizations like Planned Parenthood of North, Central and Southern 
New Jersey and Jobs for Americas Graduates New Jersey. Throughout all 
of his leadership positions he worked to foster an environment where 
public service is seen as a way to better ones community.
  As President and CEO, Channell provided direction to frontline staff 
that interfaced with the public on a daily basis and reflected the 
mission and nature of the organization throughout New Jersey. His 
leadership led to many programs that improved the lives of so many 
people living in Ocean, Atlantic, and Cape May Counties, including Head 
Start and Early Head Start, Home Energy, Affordable Housing, Housing 
Counseling, and Intensive Case Management Services programs--all of 
which are designed to assist low income people and families across the 
state.
  Channell embodies the spirit of service that makes me proud to 
represent people like him in New Jersey. We are lucky to have him as a 
member of our community and I wish him the best of luck as he endeavors 
on the next chapter of his life.
I rise today to honor United States Army 
veteran First Sergeant Donald Ernest Yetman.
  Donald was born on November 1, 1942, in Little Compton, Rhode Island, 
and raised in

Plattsburgh, New York. He attended Our Lady of Victory Academy in 
Plattsburgh where he played varsity basketball, football, and baseball. 
After graduation, Donald enlisted in the United States Army in 1962. He 
achieved the rank of Staff Sergeant during his six-year career, serving 
at Fort Bragg, Fort Benning, Fort Jackson, and on the Korean Peninsula. 
Upon the culmination of his military service in 1968, First Sergeant 
Yetman was awarded the Army Service Ribbon, the Navy/Marine Corps 
Outstanding Performance Defense Ribbon with three Bronze Stars, the Air 
Force Commendation Medal, the National Defense Service Medal, the Air 
Medal, the Armed Forces Reserve Medal, and multiple Army Commendation 
Medals.
  After his honorable discharge from the U.S. Army, Donald served in 
the National Guard while also working as a U.S. Postmaster in East 
Greenbush, New York. He supervised delivery service and played a role 
in implementing the ``Zip-plus-four system in New York State (NYS) 
while increasing mail efficiency in the city. After twenty-three years, 
he retired from both positions and was honorably named a First Sergeant 
of the National Guard, earning the NYS Military Commendation Medal, the 
NYS Exercise Support Ribbon, the NYS Humane Service Medal, and multiple 
NYS Aid to Civil Authority Medals.
  Donald married his wife Ann Ellen Bernier in 1966 and proudly raised 
their three sons, Robert, Aaron, and Peter. A stalwart member of his 
community, Donald joined the East Greenbush Fire Company Couse Corners 
Station, the Elks Lodge, the Knights of Columbus, local Little League 
and Pop Warner teams, and served as Chairman of Boy Scouts Troop 54. 
Donald enjoyed hunting, reading, and watching football games with his 
family. Most of all, he loved to watch his sons automobile races.
  First Sergeant Donald Yetmans dedication and service to the United 
States is truly remarkable. On behalf of New Yorks 21st District, I am 
honored to recognize his extraordinary life.
today I rise to honor the 160th 
anniversary of Calvary Episcopal Church in Americus, Georgia. 
Established in 1864 during the Civil War, this historic church has been 
a cornerstone of faith and community in Southwest Georgia. The 
congregation celebrated this momentous occasion on Wednesday, August 
28, 2024, in Americus.
  The history of the Episcopal Church in Americus began in 1858, with 
the first service officiated by Bishop Stephen Elliott. Despite the 
bloody and bitter challenges of the Civil War, the parish was 
reestablished in 1864 as Calvary Episcopal Church, symbolizing hope and 
resilience during a time of great turmoil. Rising from the ashes of 
hate and division--not succumbing to fear, anger, and distrust--is not 
only part of the legacy of Calvary Episcopal Church, but a hallmark of 
faith and service to the Lord. Overcoming hardship makes the faithful 
stronger, equipping one with the full armor of God.
  Reverend James Bolan Lawrence, who served as rector from 1905 to 
1947, played a pivotal role in the churchs development and in the 
spread of the Episcopal faith throughout the region. Reverend Lawrence 
founded several churches across Southwest Georgia and was recognized as 
a saint by the Episcopal Diocese of Georgia in 1999 for his 
extraordinary contributions. Reverend Lawrence spearheaded the 
construction of the present church and had a significant impact on the 
church members he served and the community at-large. He dedicated his 
life to those in need: the sick, the poor, the young, and the elderly. 
Reverend Lawrences impact cannot be understated and his work in 
service of others left a lasting mark.
  Over the years, Calvary Episcopal Church has undergone numerous 
restorations and expansions, including the construction of a parish 
hall and other facilities that have supported its mission. The current 
church building, completed in 1921, was designed by the renowned Gothic 
architect Ralph Adams Cram and stands as a testament to the strength of 
faith and service of the Calvary Episcopal Church congregation. Today, 
the church continues to be a beacon of faith and service in the 
community. Calvary Episcopal Church is and will remain a model of 
inclusion and benevolence.
  Calvary Episcopal Church endures today because the mission of the 
church shall never die. Faith, service, duty, and humility continue to 
shape the congregation of Calvary Episcopal Church. Romans 12:1 tells 
us, ``I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye 
present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, 
which is your reasonable service. The Lord calls upon his people to 
live their service to him. In doing so, the faithful heal the sick, 
clothe and provide safe harbor for the poor, and ensure hope need not 
be a luxury for those who have much at the expense of those who have 
little.
, today I ask my colleagues to join my wife, Vivian, and 
me, along with the more than 765,000 people of Georgias Second 
Congressional District in recognizing and honoring Calvary Episcopal 
Church on its 160th anniversary. May their faith and actions continue 
to inspire others and make positive change in the Southwest Georgia 
community.
I rise today to congratulate 
members of the Inaugural Class of the Bethel High School Athletic Hall 
of Fame. The honorees have distinguished themselves for their 
commitment to sportsmanship and their contributions to the sports 
community. To acknowledge their many accomplishments, the Bethel High 
School Athletic Hall of Fame will have an Induction Ceremony on 
Saturday, August 31, 2024.
  Bethel High School, home to the Bruins, is an institution that has a 
rich legacy of success with its athletic programs. Throughout its 
fifty-five-year existence, the school has fielded numerous teams that 
have successfully won district and state championships in multiple 
sports. In addition, several former students have gone on to make 
significant contributions as collegiate and professional athletes.
, the inaugural class of the Bethel Athletic Hall of Fame 
includes figures who have, simply put, helped Bethel High School 
establish its identity. Inductee Allen Iverson, a 2016 Basketball Hall 
of Fame Inductee, was a member of the Bethel basketball team. As the 
starting point guard, he joined Inductee Tony Rutland on the 1993 State 
Championship Basketball team. Mr. Iverson played on for Georgetown 
University en route to his Hall of Fame Professional Basketball career. 
a successful collegiate basketball player 
with Wake Forest University, where the Mens Basketball team won back-
to-back Atlantic Coast Conference Championships in the 1996 and 1997 
seasons. Inductee Mike Bailey coached the Boys Varsity Basketball team 
from 1985-1994. He coached the team to regular season, tournament and 
playoff championships, including the 1993 AAA State Championship.
  Bethels Football team has also been revered in the City of Hampton 
for its sustained excellence on the gridiron. Coached by Inductee 
Dennis Kozlowski, the program won three state championships during his 
twenty-five-year tenure. Inductee Mike Dunn was the starting 
quarterback and safety on the 1974 AAA State Championship team. 
Inductee Allen Iverson was the starting quarterback, defensive back and 
kick returner on the 1992 Division 5 championship team.
, the Bethel Track and Field program has enjoyed 
tremendous success for several generations. Coached by Inductee Eddie 
Williams, the program amassed fourteen state championships between the 
boys and girls teams. One of his most prominent athletes was Inductee 
Francena McCorory, who broke national indoor track records in the 300-
meter and 400-meter races. Ms McCorory later won an Olympic Gold Medal 
as a member of the 4x400 Relay team during the Games of the XXX 
Olympiad in London, England.
  Inductee Glenn ``Skeeter Heath, II, was a standout member of the 
boys golf team as a student-athlete at Bethel High School. He won the 
Group AAA State High School Individual Championship en route to being 
named an All-American on the collegiate level at East Tennessee State 
University. He later enjoyed a professional golf career on the PGA 
Tour.
  Inductee Stephen Forbes was the first State Championship wrestler in 
Bethel High School history. He went on to wrestle on the collegiate 
level with the College of William and Mary.
, lastly, Liberty Baptist Church, a prominent church in 
the Bethel neighborhood, is also being inducted for its various 
contributions to the Bethel High School Athletic program.
, as the Inductees family, friends and supporters gather 
for the Induction Ceremony, I join them in thanking them for all they 
have done for the Bethel High School family, the City of Hampton, and 
their legions of fans.
I rise to mark the 15th annual International 
Day Against Nuclear Tests on August 29, and to commend the Republic of 
Kazakhstan for its role in working collaboratively with the United 
States to pursue nuclear disarmament and our shared nonproliferation 
goals. In doing so, our two countries have preserved peace, stability, 
and a world free from the ever-present threat of nuclear conflict.
  When the Soviet Union dissolved in 1991, it left behind 35,000 
nuclear weapons at sites across the Eurasian landmass. With thousands 
of nuclear-armed ICBMs in places like Belarus and Ukraine, the newly-
formed Republic of Kazakhstan inherited the worlds fourth-largest 
nuclear arsenal, which was also home of the Semipalatinsk nuclear test 
site. From Semipalatinsks establishment in 1946 to its decommission in 
1995, Soviet authorities carried out 468 nuclear tests at the test 
site. The total impact of these tests between 1949 and 1963 was 2,500 
times more powerful than the atomic bomb the U.S. dropped on Hiroshima. 
The toxic radioactive fallout these tests yielded caused irreparable 
damage to more than 1.3 million people in Kazakhstan and severe 
ecological harm to the area surrounding the test site.
  In 1989, before the dissolution of the Soviet Union, anti-nuclear war 
activists in Kazakhstan established the Nevada-Semipalatinsk Movement. 
This grassroots initiative supported by victims of Nevadas own nuclear 
legacy sought the closure of Semipalatinsk and the cessation of nuclear 
testing. Of the 18 planned detonations in 1989, 11 were stopped thanks 
to the groups committed advocacy and resilience. The Nevada-
Semipalatinsk Movement underscores the bond and shared history between 
Nevadans and Kazakhs.
  Despite any strategic advantage that retention of the Soviet Unions 
arsenal may have provided to Kazakhstan, its leadership understood the 
potential political, humanitarian, and environmental ramifications of 
its development. On August 29, 1991, Kazakhstan made the historic and 
noble decision to close the Semipalatinsk test site. In its place, the 
National Nuclear Center of Kazakhstan was established to assist in 
eliminating the infrastructure for the storage and use of nuclear 
weapons. It would also provide scientific and technical support for the 
peaceful use of atomic energy.
  In 1992, Kazakhstan ratified the Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty 
(START 1) and a few years later, all of Kazakhstans 104 ICBMs were 
safely removed and destroyed. The Kazakh government doubled-down on its 
commitment to global peace, security, and nonproliferation by becoming 
a party to the Treaty on Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons in 1993, 
a member of the International Atomic Energy Agency in 1994, and a 
cosigner of the Comprehensive Nuclear Test-Ban Treaty in 1996.
  Meanwhile, in partnership with the United States, Kazakhstan removed 
1,322 pounds of highly enriched uranium from the Ulba Metallurgical 
Plant under the Nunn-Lugar Cooperative Threat Reduction Program. As 
part of this program, our two countries took monumental steps to remove 
residual materials and technologies related to weapons of mass 
destruction in Kazakhstan, signaling a major shift in the global 
security and political paradigm and building momentum that catalyzed 
the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty.
  In 2010, the United Nations General Assembly adopted a resolution 
calling for an International Day Against Nuclear Tests. Thus, August 
29th was selected to commend and recognize Kazakhstans honorable 
decision to close the Semipalatinsk test site and renounce nuclear 
weapons.
  With Cold War-style nuclear saber-rattling becoming the new norm, it 
is important, on this International Day Against Nuclear Tests, to 
highlight the successful steps taken by the United States and 
Kazakhstan to mitigate the dangers of nuclear weapons, institute global 
nonproliferation regimes, and adhere to international norms around 
nuclear testing.
RECOGNIZING JAMES &amp; 
                              PAMELA REID
Mr Speaker, I rise today to congratulate James and 
Pamela Reid, two lifelong farmers who were recently Inducted into the 
Michigan Farmers Hall of Fame.
  James and Pamela began their journey in agriculture after acquiring a 
modest farm in 1978, which since then has transformed into the highly 
productive Reid Dairy Farm. Under their management, the farm expanded 
from 120 to 900 acres, supporting 300 cows. Their focus on productivity 
and employing new technology has significantly enhanced milk 
production, leading to an impressive 95 pounds per cow all while 
maintaining superior milk quality standards.
  Their leadership extends beyond the fields and into civic engagement, 
where James roles as Grant Township Supervisor and Chair of the St. 
Clair County Farmland Preservation Board reflect his deep commitment to 
our community. These positions allowed him to influence local 
agricultural policies positively and advocate for the preservation and 
sustainability of farming in the region.
  Moreover, the Reids proactive approach included substantial upgrades 
to their farming infrastructure, adding a modern barn and updating 
milking systems. These improvements boosted efficiency and served as a 
showcase for responsible agriculture.
  Throughout his career, James has also contributed his expertise to 
several boards, including the MMPA Dairy Co-Op and the United Dairy 
Industry of Michigan. His leadership as President of the UDIM and his 
active participation on the Michigan Dairy Market Committee have been 
crucial in promoting the interests of local dairy farmers and 
influencing industry standards at both the state and national levels.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in congratulating James 
and Pamela Reid on their induction into the Michigan Farmers Hall of 
Fame. Their commitment to excellence, ability to adapt to change, and 
commitment to their community should serve as an inspiration to us all.
having worked in a family-run small business 
my whole life, I understand both the challenges and importance of 
running a successful small business venture. As you know, U.S. small 
businesses make up about 99.9 percent of all businesses and create more 
than 60 percent of all new jobs. Accordingly, I would like to take a 
moment to recognize the 2024 award recipients for the Youngstown Warren 
Regional Chambers annual Salute to Business. I am proud to be able to 
honor these recipients for their work as upstanding business leaders in 
the community.
, owner of Top Property Holdings, will be presented 
with the Business Professional of the Year.
, chief executive officer of KO Consulting, Inc., 
will be presented with the Business Advocate of the Year.
, executive director of United Returning Citizens, 
will be presented with the Non-Profit Professional of the Year award.
, president of YOGO Bikeshare, will be presented 
with the Entrepreneur of the Year award.
, owner of Sweet Melissas Good Eats, will be 
presented with the Small Business Professional of the Year award.
, Jr., of Carpenters Local 171, will be 
presented with the Salute to Labor Achievement Award.
  Finally, Ms. Sarah OBrien, owner of a chain of Little Tart Bakeshop 
locations in Atlanta, will be presented with the Valley Champion Award.
  I ask my colleagues in the United States House of Representatives to 
join me in recognizing these honorable leaders, pillars of the 
Youngstown Warren community, as we congratulate them on their 
accomplishments and their contributions to the community. These 
admirable citizens illustrate the thriving Ohio business community I am 
proud to represent, and may their work continue to be a blessing to our 
industrious Nation.
I rise today to honor and 
recognize the 50th wedding anniversary of Larry and Betty Deason.
  Larry Kenneth Deason was born in Anniston, Alabama, on February 9, 
1952, to George Henry Deason and Mary Jewell Deason of Anniston. Betty 
Lowe Bagley was born on March 24, 1952, to Oscar Miller Bagley and 
Madell Lowe Bagley.
  Larry and Betty both attended Anniston High School and graduated in 
1970, the last class to graduate from the old high school building. 
They started dating their senior year at AHS.
  Their first date was a Coke party hosted by the George Neely Chapter 
of Hi-Y. They dated off and on through the rest of high school and 
college.
  Larry and Betty married on July 20, 1974, at Parker Memorial Baptist 
Church in Anniston. They are blessed with their daughter Maryann D. 
Gendron, son-in-law Steven Gendron, grandson Henry Steven Gendron and 
granddaughter Sarah Kathryn Gendron.
  The Deasons spend most of their time at the lake in Wedowee, Alabama, 
or attending banking conventions. They celebrated their 50th 
anniversary on a Mediterranean cruise with dear friends.
, please join me in recognizing this milestone for my dear 
friends, Larry and Betty Deason and wishing them a happy 50th 
anniversary.
ASSOCIATION AND THE 110TH ANNIVERSARY OF BURBANK, CALIFORNIAS FIRST 
                             of california
I rise today in honor of the 75th 
anniversary of the Burbank Tournament of Roses Association and 110th 
anniversary of the City of Burbanks first float in the Pasadena 
Tournament of Roses Parade.
  The City of Burbank has been represented in the Rose Parade since 
1914, when the City

of Burbank, the Burbank Chamber of Commerce, and other civic 
organizations entered Burbanks first float. That float, entitled 
``Goddess of Plenty, featured an intricate dragons head and a large 
cornucopia filled with assorted vegetables, and was awarded a silver 
cup trophy. Since that time, Burbank has participated in the parade 
intermittently, including a few years where decorated automobiles were 
entered instead of floats. From 1935 to 1940, the Burbank city schools 
took responsibility for the floats, and after a few years hiatus 
during World War II, the city sponsored floats, including an Isabella 
Coleman-designed float, made by professional float building companies, 
in 1947 and 1948.
  When the City Council decided that funds would be better used for 
infrastructure and announced that Burbank would not participate in the 
1949 Rose Parade, Burbank resident Esther Klein led the effort to 
privately finance a float. After gaining widespread community support 
for a hometown-built float, Mrs Klein brought a self-designed model of 
the proposed entry and exploratory plans for a permanent Burbank 
Tournament of Roses committee to the Burbank City Council, and 
subsequently received the councils approval. Thanks to the very first 
and newly elected Burbank Tournament of Roses Association President 
Esther Kleins stellar leadership, and against many odds, the 
association members and the Burbank community raised funds and 
mobilized volunteers to design, build, and decorate the 1949 float 
entitled ``First Love, which won First Prize for its division.
  Over 75 years, Burbanks float has won thirty-three major awards 
including three Sweepstakes Awards for Best Float Entry. Burbanks 
annual float entry in this emblematic New Years Day tradition is a 
product of the unwavering dedication, hard work and local civic pride 
demonstrated by the Burbank Tournament of Roses Association and 
countless other civic organizations and community volunteers.
  I ask all Members to join me today in recognizing the 75th 
anniversary of the Burbank Tournament of Roses Association and the 
110th anniversary of Burbanks first float in the Pasadena Tournament 
of Roses Parade.
I rise today to congratulate the Boerne All-
Stars and their historic run in the 2024 Little League World Series.
  After going undefeated in local and regional games all summer long, 
the Boerne All-Stars punched their ticket to Williamsport, 
Pennsylvania.
  Representing the Southwest Region in the Little League World Series 
this year for the first time ever, the Boerne Little Leaguers came in 
fourth place in this years tournament and came out of the winners 
bracket undefeated.
  Led by Coach Jonathan Collins, Coach Bert Munoz, and Team Manager 
Justin Newson, the 12-strong team showed the entire world the grit and 
excellence that Boerne has to offer.
  This team is truly exceptional. One teammate, Kole Newson, underwent 
open heart surgery four years ago and still showed out to display what 
makes Texas so great. This entire team is full of amazing players. They 
went

undefeated in the winners bracket and they all should be proud of 
their efforts.
  All these boys, Kaleb Christ, Jett Matthews, Doc Mogford, Gray 
Collins, Dylan Burke, Aiden Munoz, Gage Steubing, Kole Newson, Julian 
Hurst, Ben Burkhart, Cooper Hastings, and Caden Guffey have performed 
an amazing feat. The coaches, parents, and everyone in Boerne who 
mentored these boys, built them up, and supported them have done a 
great job and should be proud of what these boys did.
  I extend my heartfelt congratulations to the Boerne All-Stars; you 
have made all of Texas proud.
RECOGNIZING THE LOVELADY FAMILY AWARDED ALABAMAS OUTSTANDING YOUNG 
                               of alabama
I ask for the Houses attention 
today to recognize Whit and Amanda Lovelady and their children 
Annagrace and John Luke for being named Alabamas Outstanding Young 
Farm Family. The Talladega County farmers received the honor during the 
Alabama Farmers Federation Farm &amp; Land Conference on August 3rd in 
Montgomery, Alabama.
  The Lovelady family raise cattle and hay and have built their farm 
from the ground up over the last decade. They annually bale 10,000 
rolls of hay while managing Angus, Charolais and commercial cattle 
herds at Cedar Roost Ranch. The Loveladys make every acre of their farm 
count. In addition to the cattle and hay, they custom bale and 
fertilize fields for their neighbors, sell freezer beef and pork and 
use a forestry mulcher to make land more productive. These young 
farmers are working diligently to expand these operations.
  Their two young children have seen Whit and Amanda model a love for 
farming and are already deeply invested in life on the farm. Whit was 
influenced by his late grandfather Windle Batchelor and Amanda by her 
late father O.E. Williams, Jr.
  Their passion for agriculture runs deep, and they have encouraged 
younger generations to be involved in Alabamas No. 1 industry. They 
are leaders in the Alabama Farmers Federation and their community. Whit 
also serves as Talladega County Cattlemens Association President.
, please join me in recognizing this young family on this 
great honor. Congratulations to the Loveladys.