I rise today to introduce a bill to end the 
exclusionary and discriminatory practices of private shipping services 
to Hawaii and the other non-contiguous parts of our country.
  My home state of Hawaii is located almost 2,500 miles off the West 
Coast. We depend on shipping more than many other locations in our 
country, importing well over 90 percent of our life necessities, yet 
people living in Hawaii have encountered 3 unfair shipping practices.
  First, when ordering essentials online, we often learn that a 
particular online store or item doesnt even ship to Hawaii at all. The 
Federal Trade Commission (FTC) reviewed this issue and confirmed that 
``some companies . . . are unwilling to ship products to Alaska, 
Hawaii, Puerto Rico, and the other territories. This exclusion 
prevents a few million Americans in the non-contiguous states from 
obtaining key products that should be available to them.
  Second, as many of my constituents know, those who live in Hawaii are 
often denied free shipping options from online retailers. It is so 
painful when a website advertises free shipping and you fill up your 
shopping cart and input your address only for a red error message to 
pop up with the news that Hawaii, Alaska, Guam and elsewhere are not 
included in the free shipping deal.
  Third, even when companies do ship to Hawaii, the prices bears no 
reasonable relationship to the distances involved. The cost to ship to 
and from anywhere in the United States depends on several factors, 
including the weight and size of your package and service class. 
However, according to the FTC, private shipping companies delivery 
options may cost considerably more for a destination in Alaska, Hawaii, 
Puerto Rico and the other U.S. territories than for the contiguous 
states. For example, a 2-pound package sent from Los Angeles to Hawaii 
costs $45.33, but the same shipment from Los Angeles to New York is 
just $14.28. This outrageous price is from a private shipping company 
that categorizes shipping to Hawaii as an international shipment. It is 
hard to believe that over 60 years after becoming a state and over 120 
years after becoming part of America, Hawaii is still treated as a 
foreign country.
  These price discrepancies also bear no relation to the product and 
are included regardless of the distance between the sender and the 
recipient. For example, 1 private shipping company charges 
approximately $150 to ship a small package from Seattle to Juneau in 2 
days, whereas the same package would cost approximately $65 to ship a 
much greater distance from Seattle to Washington, D.C. in 2 days.
  We--the non-contiguous areas of our country--are bearing the burden 
of these 3 discriminatory shipping practices. My bill, the Fair 
Shipping for Non-Contiguous Areas Act, addresses all 3 problems. It 
would require shippers to support all locations within our country. It 
would also end the exclusionary and discriminatory pricing practices of 
private shipping companies to and from my home state of Hawaii and 
elsewhere--excluding them from free shipping or charging exorbitated 
rates. In doing so, we will break these shipping companies 
stranglehold on exposed communities and address another contributor to 
the sky-high living costs in Hawaii and other noncontiguous locations. 
I urge my colleagues to support this bill as a matter of fairness for 
the people of Hawaii and all other Americans who do not live in the 
continental United States.
I rise to recognize Mr. Abdul Noor, 
winner of a Black Engineer of the Year Award.
  The youngest of four siblings and the son of a single mother, Abdul 
and his family faced many challenges in his youth. Abdul was born in 
Pakistan after his mother made the difficult decision to leave her home 
in search of a better life for her family. At the age of three, Abduls 
mom relocated her family to Idaho with the help of a refugee 
organization. They eventually made their way to Virginia in search of 
opportunities for their family.
  Growing up, Abdul was an active learner--he played baseball, swam, 
practiced martial arts, and participated in clubs where he learned 
about computers and robotics. Throughout his high school career, Abdul 
served as the president of his high school Red Cross chapter, organized 
toy drives, and was an active volunteer in the community. His love for 
the medical field stems from his mothers career as a pediatrician, 
which she sacrificed to give her children a better life. Abdul credits 
family meal conversations with his mom and sisters for sparking his 
interest in the biomedical engineering field and helping steer his 
college career. After graduating from high school, Abdul attended 
George Mason University where he focused his undergraduate studies on 
biomedical engineering. He graduated Magna Cum Laude in 2020, was 
awarded the Chairmans Award, and was also class speaker.
  After graduation, Abdul joined MITRE as an Associate Biomedical 
Engineer after having interned with them his junior year of college. As 
a member of the MITRE team, Abdul continued to learn and grow and 
excelled on projects due to his ability to adapt and learn quickly. In 
addition to his work at MITRE, Abdul is the CEO of Rune Innovations 
Inc., a medical device startup he founded with the goal of designing, 
patenting, and marketing surgical airway management devices for use by 
medical professionals. Abdul and the Rune team have since developed a 
patent-pending device called the Sliding Jaw Thrust Device (SJTD) which 
would allow a medical professional to clear a patients obstructed 
airway by mimicking the jaw thrust maneuver. Abduls leadership was 
invaluable in navigating the process of creating and applying for a 
patent for this technology.
  Abduls commitment to biomedical engineering and professional growth 
is admirable. His strong work ethic has led him to be this years 
recipient of a Black Engineer of the Year Award (BEYA). Specifically, 
Abdul was named the winner of a Modern-Day Technology Leader Award by a 
panel of leaders from industry, government, and academia in recognition 
for his work in shaping the future of engineering, science, and 
technology.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in congratulating Mr. 
Abdul Noor, recipient of the Modern-Day Technology Leader Award. I 
applaud his strong work ethic and dedication to learning and look 
forward to all that he will accomplish in the years to come.
I rise today to commemorate the life and 
legacy of Ruth Alvia Munchus Baker, a pillar of our Fort Worth 
community.
  Ruth Alvia Munchus Baker was born June 16, 1931, in Fort Worth and 
completed her education at historic I.M. Terrell High School. In 1948, 
she began a devoted marriage and partnership with Herbert Baker and 
later became the proud mother of five daughters.
She was employed in her family business at Baker Funeral Home 
for more than sixty years, serving in many roles, including 
receptionist, musician, lady attendant, beautician and cosmetologist, 
board member, and co-owner. Mrs. Baker was revered as a friendly and 
knowledgeable employee who knew how to do nearly every task associated 
with funeral services. Blessed with a long life, Mrs. Baker continued 
working for her family business well into her ninety-second year.
a woman of faith. Ruth began her journey starting 
at a young age at Saint John Missionary Baptist Church on Baptist Hill. 
She later would become a founding member of the Beth-Eden Baptist 
Church in Fort Worth. Later, she united with Macedonia Missionary 
Baptist Church, where she served as a Trustee, Sunday School teacher, 
member of the Choir, Brownettes and General Mission.

  In 2019, she united with Baker Chapel African Methodist Episcopal 
Church under the pastoral leadership of Reverend Walter McDonald. 
There, Mrs. Baker was a Class Leader, member of the Church School, 
Prayer, and Daily Devotion ministries, while also participating in the 
monthly food give-away and in the Lay Organization.
  My thoughts and prayers are with all those who knew and loved Mrs. 
Baker, particularly her extensive, loving family. May her memory last 
forever.
I rise to honor 2 Capitol Police officers, 
Officer Jacob J. Chestnut, Jr., and Detective John M. Gibson, who were 
shot and killed by a gunman in the Capitol on July 24, 1998.
  In the afternoon of July 24, 1998, a lone gunman forced his way past 
a security checkpoint, fatally shooting Officer Chestnut. The assailant 
ran toward an entrance that led to the offices of Tom DeLay of Texas, 
the Majority Whip. Detective Gibson, a member of DeLays protective 
team, told others to hide and find cover. The gunman shot Gibson, and 
although mortally wounded, Gibson returned fire, striking the gunman. 
Detective Gibsons selfless acts resulted in lives saved and provided 
an opportunity for responding officers to restrain the gunman and end 
the horrific events that day.
  Officer Jacob Joseph Chestnut, Jr., was a 20-year Air Force veteran, 
having served 2 tours in Vietnam, and retired as a Master Sergeant. He 
has the distinction of being the first African American to lie in honor 
at the Capitol. He was 58 years old.
  Detective John Michael Gibson had been selected as part of the 
dignitary protection team for Congressman Tom DeLay and had served with 
the United States Capitol Police for 18 years. He left behind his wife, 
a 17-year-old daughter, and 2 sons, 14 and 15 years old. He laid in 
honor with Officer Chestnut in the Capitol rotunda.
  Both men were buried with full honors in Arlington National Cemetery. 
These men gave their lives in defense of the democracy that serves all 
of us while defending the lives of congressmen and -women, 
congressional staffers, and other United States Capitol Police 
officers.
  In the days that followed, Representative DeLay stated that the death 
of these officers symbolized, ``the sacrifices of thousands of police 
officers across the Nation who do their duty to serve and protect the 
public, sometimes under great abuse, sometimes under great disregard, 
and many times people take them for granted. It all comes together when 
an incident like this happens and we realize how much we owe to police 
officers all over this country.
  Ill say that the women and men who comprise the United States 
Capitol Police Department continue to be a very important component in 
safeguarding the form of government that allows us daily and routine 
freedoms.
  Today we remember Officer Jacob Chestnut and Detective John Gibson 
while thanking all who are a part of the United States Capitol Police 
Department.
today, I introduce the District of Columbia 
Zoning Commission Home Rule Act. This bill would give the District of 
Columbia the authority to appoint all members of the D.C. Zoning 
Commission (Commission). Currently, the membership of the Commission 
consists of two federal officials (the Architect of the Capitol (AOC) 
and the Director of the National Park Service (NPS)) and three members 
appointed by the D.C. mayor, subject to D.C. Council approval. The 
federal officials are members even though the Commission has no 
authority over federal property.
  Land use is a quintessential local matter in our country. Despite the 
D.C. Home Rule Act, which gave D.C. authority over local matters, 40 
percent of the members of the Commission are federal officials, who are 
unaccountable to the nearly 700,000 residents who live in D.C.. The 
federal government would lose nothing under this bill because the 
federal governments land-use interests in the nations capital are 
protected by federal law and federal agencies.
  The Commission creates the zoning maps and regulations, which must 
``not be inconsistent with the comprehensive plan for the national 
capital. The mayor is responsible for the local elements of the 
comprehensive plan, subject to Council approval. The National Capital 
Planning Commission (NCPC), which is the central federal planning 
agency for the federal government in D.C. and approves federal projects 
here, is responsible for the federal elements of the comprehensive 
plan. This bill would not alter the comprehensive plan process or the 
authority of NCPC and the Commission.
  This bill would immediately remove the AOC and the NPS Director from 
the Commission, and the Commission would, at least initially, consist 
solely of three mayoral appointees. D.C. would have the authority to 
reconstitute the membership of the Commission through local 
legislation.
  This is an important step to increase D.C. home rule, and I urge my 
colleagues to support this bill.
today I introduce the Hemp Access and 
Consumer Safety Act. This legislation would allow the U.S. Food and 
Drug Administration (FDA) to regulate hemp and hemp-derived cannabidiol 
(CBD) like any other legal dietary ingredients, foods, and beverages.
  U.S. cannabis laws are broken, and legalizing hemp was a significant 
step forward. However, in order for the market to fully operate with 
hemp and hemp-derived CBD products with a federal consumer safety 
standard, FDA has to regulate these products. FDA has announced that it 
does not plan to use existing authorities to regulate these products.
  I am introducing this legislation in partnership with my fellow 
Oregonian, Senator Wyden, because our constituents are directly 
impacted by this gap in federal safety standards. As the public has 
grown increasingly interested in CBD, the federal governments consumer 
protection mechanisms have failed to keep up.
  The Hemp Access and Consumer Safety Act will finally bring CBD 
regulations up to par with the safety standards Americans should be 
able to expect for these legal products. It will also ensure packaging 
and labeling can be regulated to prevent minors accessing these 
products or any other undue confusion for consumers.
  I look forward to working with my co-leads, Senators Ron Wyden and 
Rand Paul, and my colleagues in the House and Senate to enact this 
legislation and finally guarantee common-sense safety regulations for 
hemp and hemp-derived products.
due to my attendance at the 
Select Subcommittee on the Weaponization of the Federal Governments 
hearing and the delay in recessing the hearing for votes, I missed the 
first 2 votes on Thursday, July 20, 2023.
  Had I been present, I would have voted YEA on Roll Call No. 361 and 
NAY on Roll Call No. 362.
I include in the Record a 
segment of the White Houses Statement of Administration Policy in 
regard to Section 813 of the Securing Growth and Robust Leadership in 
American Aviation Act:

       Maintaining Safe and Secure Airspace During Major Sports 
     Events. While the Administration supports the goal of 
     providing accessibility to and public use of the national 
     airspace, it is concerned that provisions proposed in the 
     bill could introduce unnecessary risks to those attending 
     major sporting events if the effectiveness of safety and 
     security buffers currently provided by temporary flight 
     restrictions were to be decreased. To the extent that the 
     proposed provisions are intended to accommodate airshows, the 
     Administration urges the Congress to consider alternative 
     methods to deconflict airshows and major sports events rather 
     than potentially put aviation operations in close proximity 
     to events attended by millions of Americans each year.