I rise to commemorate the 150th 
anniversary of Confluence, Pennsylvania, and its important 
contributions to southwestern Pennsylvania.
  In 1870, the Confluence Land Company purchased an area in the 
Turkeyfoot Valley and laid out the town. Named for its location as the 
meeting point of Laurel Hill Creek and the Casselman and Youghiogheny 
Rivers, the town grew quickly and was incorporated as a borough just 3 
years later, in 1873. By 1883, the town was already home to 450 people. 
Shipping and commerce were critical to the towns early prosperity 
because of its easy access to both water and railroads.
  Today, Confluence is a hub of outdoor recreation. Visitors to 
Confluence can enjoy many miles of adventurous hiking at nearby 
Ohiopyle State Park, scale the tallest Pennsylvania mountain at Mount 
Davis, bike through the Great Allegheny Passage, and enjoy some of the 
best boating our Nation has to offer. The regions incredible fall 
foliage adds even more appeal to Confluences already amazing natural 
scenery.
, the story of Confluence is uniquely American and 
important to our commonwealths rich history. On behalf of the people 
of Pennsylvanias 14th Congressional District, I congratulate 
Confluence on this remarkable milestone and look forward to building on 
this storied history over the next 150 years.
I rise to celebrate the retirement of 
Colonel Adam J. Czekanski, who will retire from his post as Commander 
of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers Pittsburgh District on August 4, 
2023.
  Colonel Czekanski served honorably in the U.S. Army Corps of 
Engineers for 25 years. He began his career in 1998 after earning a 
Bachelor of Science degree in Agricultural and Biological Engineering 
from Cornell University as well as a Master of Science degree in 
Environmental and Water Resources Engineering from the University of 
Texas.
  Colonel Czekanski has served in a variety of important roles since 
joining the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. He was the Deputy District 
Commander for the San Francisco region, the Operations Officer for the 
South Pacific Division, and the Commander of the Buffalo District 
before finally taking a post as the Commander of the Pittsburgh 
District.
  During his time in leadership, Colonel Czekanski mobilized the 
Corpss workforce and operational capacity to confront a variety of 
environmental and engineering challenges unique to western 
Pennsylvania. During his command of the Pittsburgh District, Colonel 
Czekanski also traveled around the country on multiple Temporary 
Emergency Power Deployments to help rebuild communities after 
hurricanes and wildfires. His eagerness to serve those in need is an 
example to us all.
  Over the course of his service, Colonel Czekanski was awarded a 
Purple Heart, 3 Bronze Stars, and a Soldiers Medal. These awards are a 
testament to his dedication to the United States, our nations 
military, and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.
, Colonel Adam J. Czekanskis diligent service to his 
brothers at arms, our communities, and our entire nation is evidence of 
a life well-lived and a retirement well-earned. On behalf of 
Pennsylvanias 14th Congressional District, I congratulate him on his 
retirement and many impressive accomplishments throughout a successful 
military career.
CONGRATULATING COLUMBIAS ROCK BRIDGE ON THEIR CLASS 5 STATE 
                              of missouri
I rise today to ask my colleagues to 
join me in congratulating Columbias Rock Bridge Track and Field Team 
on their victory in the Class 5 Track and Field Team State 
Championship.
  Rock Bridge claimed the Class 5 title in 2021, 2022, and now in 2023. 
The Bruins fought through an intensely close state championship. They 
worked incredibly hard, entered the final event up 15.5 points, and 
finished strong to win the title. The Bruins should be commended for 
all their hard work throughout the past year and for bringing home the 
state championship to their school and community.
, please join me in recognizing the Rock Bridge Bruins for 
a job well done.
I rise today to ask my colleagues to 
join me in congratulating Columbia Independents Scholar Bowl Team on 
their victory in Missouris Scholar Bowl State Championship.
  Asher, Sophie, Elijah, Emily, and Graham conquered the tournament, 
averaging an impressive 150 points higher than their opponents in each 
round. As winners of the first team state championship in their 
schools history, the Lions should be commended for all their hard work 
throughout the past year and for bringing home the state championship 
to their school and community.
, please join me in recognizing Columbia Independents 
Scholar Bowl Team for a job well done.
I rise today to ask my colleagues to 
join me in congratulating Father Toltons Olivia Andrews on her victory 
in Missouris Class 2 3200 Meter Run State Championship.
  Olivia claimed the Class 2 title with the impressive time of 
11:02:24, achieving a school record and Class 2s fastest time of the 
season in the 3200-meter run. She ended her high school career with a 
bang as she dominated her last race before she heads off to college 
next year. Olivia should be commended for all her hard work throughout 
the past year and for bringing home the state championship to her 
school and community.
, please join me in recognizing Olivia Andrews for a job 
well done.
I rise today to ask my colleagues to 
join me in congratulating Russellvilles Trinity Riggs on her victory 
in Missouris Class 2 Shot Put State Championship.
  Trinity claimed the Class 2 title for the Indians, ending her high 
school career with an incredible throw of 11.93 meters. She should be 
commended for all her hard work throughout the past year and for 
bringing home the state championship to her school and community.
, please join me in recognizing Trinity Riggs for a job 
well done.
I rise today to ask my colleagues to 
join me in congratulating Eldon High Schools Zoe Martonfi on her 
victories in Missouris Class 3 1600 Meter Run, 800 Meter Run, and 300 
Meter Hurdles State Championships.
  Zoe claimed her first ever state titles at the Class 3 championships. 
Not only did she win one race but conquered her next two events as 
well. Zoe led the pack in the girls 1600-meter run, then won the 800-
meter run less than two hours later in addition to the 300-meter 
hurdles. Zoe should be commended for all her hard work throughout the 
past year and for bringing home the state championships to her school 
and community.
, please join me in recognizing Zoe Martonfi for a job 
well done.
I rise to congratulate Aneira Banwar for 
her volunteerism, service, and acts of kindness.
  Aneira started volunteering at the age of 5. As she began this 
journey, she realized that there are limited opportunities for children 
to donate their time. This gap led her to create the ``12K plan--12 
months of kindness. This plan consists of 12 monthly kindness projects 
that kids can do at home.
  Recently, Aneira assembled and donated more than 500 ``boredom buster 
kits for patients at a local childrens hospital. She accomplished 
this project by inspiring others in her community to join her in making 
the kits.
  Now 7 years old, Aneira has logged more than 100 hours of community 
service. Her hope is to encourage other children to volunteer in their 
community, because she believes that kids ``hold the power to shape and 
change the future in a positive way by performing random acts of 
kindness 1 month at a time.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in congratulating Aneira 
Banwar. Her commitment to others is noble and inspiring--and I look 
forward to all that she will accomplish in the future through her 
volunteer work.
I rise today to honor retired Colonel 
Jerry A. Brown for a career of service to our nation.
  Col. Brown is a 1996 graduate from the Army ROTC program at Emporia 
State University, and the second generation of his family to serve in 
the United States Army. He has faithfully served our Nation for over 30 
years, starting as an enlisted Petty Officer in the United States Navy 
before commissioning as an Officer in the United States Army. During 
his career, Col. Brown deployed to the Mediterranean while serving on 
board the USS Forrestal CV-59 in April 1988, he conducted operations to 
support the Persian Gulf War, and he participated in combat in support 
of Operation Iraqi Freedom from 2010 to 2011.
  As a Congressional Legislative Liaison Officer of the 63rd Readiness 
Division, Col. Brown has supported Army Reserve priorities, programs, 
and resources by building relationships, educating, and informing 
Senators, Representatives, State Legislators, Mayors, and non-
governmental organizations across the Divisions seven-state regional 
footprint of New Mexico, Arizona, California, Texas, Nevada, Oklahoma, 
and Arkansas.
  Further, as a Congressional Legislative Liaison Officer, he is 
responsible for legislative actions with professional organizations, 
defense industry partners, and veterans service organizations that 
includes informing, advising, and representing senior Army Reserve 
leadership on congressional activities, and for telling the Army 
Reserve Story in the 7-state region.
  In his last post, Col. Brown also provided support to the 7-state 
region as a board member for the 2022 Service Academy. He supports all 
local leaders of Nevada by providing them with information regarding 
the Army Reserve and the economic impact to states and cities. He has 
also supported the Army Reserve Ambassador Program, which supports 
students with full-ride scholarships to any ROTC program in the Nation 
with the hope that they will one day return to the Southwest as 
tomorrows leaders.
  In his over 30-year military career, including 10 different 
assignments and 2 different services, Col. Brown has shared his 
knowledge and experience with hundreds of officers and enlisted 
Soldiers, helping them to develop as leaders and enhance their careers. 
Col. Brown is an exceptional leader who will be greatly missed by the 
U.S. military when he moves into retirement, while his service will be 
long remembered by those he worked with. There is no doubt that the 
soldiers he helped train and mentor over his 30 years will continue to 
build on his legacy of service and working to make our Nation stronger.
, please join me today in honoring Colonel Jerry A. Brown 
on his outstanding service to our Nation and in congratulating him on 
his retirement.
today, I introduce a bill that would require 
the Directors of 2 federal agencies, the Court Services and Offender 
Supervision Agency for the District of Columbia (CSOSA) and the 
District of Columbia Pretrial Services Agency (PSA), to reside in the 
District of Columbia during their terms. Residency requirements for 
certain government positions are found in federal law, D.C. law and the 
laws of jurisdictions throughout the United States. The primary reason 
such laws exist is so that government officials have a connection to 
the residents they serve and in-depth knowledge of the unique issues 
and challenges faced by residents. Last Congress, the House Committee 
on Oversight and Reform passed this bill.
  CSOSA and PSA are federal agencies that focus exclusively on D.C. 
CSOSA supervises individuals on probation, parole or supervised release 
under D.C. law. PSA makes recommendations regarding pretrial release 
and supervises defendants for the D.C. Superior Court and the U.S. 
District Court for D.C. The Directors of CSOSA and PSA should be 
required to be D.C. residents since these agencies serve only D.C.
  Congress has justifiably required that certain federal officials live 
in the jurisdictions to which they are appointed, including U.S. 
district court judges, U.S. Marshals and U.S. Attorneys. Similarly, 
Congress, which controls the local D.C. court system, has justifiably 
required local D.C. judges and members of the D.C. Judicial Nomination 
Commission and the D.C. Commission on Judicial Disabilities and Tenure 
to reside in D.C.
  There is no reason that the Directors of CSOSA and PSA, federal 
agencies that uniquely serve D.C., should not be required to live in 
D.C. These federal officials need to be part of the community they 
serve. A D.C. residency requirement for these federal officials will 
lead to better outcomes in the criminal justice system and is a matter 
of fairness for D.C. residents.
  I strongly urge my colleagues to support this bill.
-DeREMER. Mr. Speaker, I was present in the House chamber 
and attempted to vote on an amendment, but the vote was not recorded. 
This was the Blumenauer Amendment to the National Defense Authorization 
Act. Had the vote been recorded, it would show that I had voted Nay on 
Roll Call No. 298.
I was unable to be present during roll call 
vote number 298. On roll call vote number 298, I would have voted YES.
I rise to congratulate Washington 
County on the 225th anniversary of its agricultural fair and celebrate 
its importance to southwestern Pennsylvanias agricultural industry 
over the years.
  The Washington County Agricultural Fair is the oldest in 
Pennsylvania, having started in 1798. Since its creation, the annual 
fair has promoted our communitys achievements in agriculture, 
horticulture, homemaking subjects, arts, and sciences. It is also an 
opportunity for 4-H clubs, FFA chapters, and many other community 
organizations to share their work with friends, neighbors, and 
visitors. Today, the 8-day event attracts over 65,000 attendees each 
year.
  Thc fair is an important part of Washington Countys history and 
heritage. Over 1,700 individual farms operate in the region, making 
agriculture the largest industry in the county.

Generations of families and farmers have worked to build a thriving and 
prosperous agricultural community, which is now a defining 
characteristic of Washington Countys economy and culture.
, on behalf of Pennsylvanias 14th Congressional District, 
I congratulate the Washington County Agricultural Fair on its 225th 
anniversary. I thank the staff, volunteers, and exhibitors for the 
important services they provide to southwestern Pennsylvania 
communities and hope for their continued success over the next 225 
years.