today, I rise to recognize and celebrate the 
50th anniversary of the Dirksen Congressional Center. Located in Pekin, 
Illinois, the Dirksen Congressional Center has served as a national 
leader in congressional research, civic education, and the preservation 
of American political history.
  Founded in 1975, the Dirksen Congressional Center began with a 
mission to honor the legacy of Senator Everett McKinley Dirksen by 
promoting a deeper understanding of Congress. Over the past five 
decades, it has expanded its reach and influence, serving tens of 
thousands of students, educators, researchers, and citizens who have 
benefited from its programs and resources.
  The Dirksen Congressional Center has distributed more than $1.4 
million in grants to fund groundbreaking research into Congress and its 
history, trained hundreds of teachers to deliver high-quality civics 
education through its Congress in the Classroom workshops and produced 
more than 20 books and monographs about Congress, its leaders, and its 
operations. Additionally, the Dirksen Congressional Centers archival 
collections now preserve the papers of nine Members of Congress, making 
primary-source documents widely accessible through projects like the 
American Congress Digital Archives Portal.
  Through its Ray and Kathy LaHood Scholarship, the Dirksen 
Congressional Center has supported Illinois college students for more 
than two decades, while the Michel-LaHood

D.C. Summer Internship Program now offers fully funded experiential 
learning for young people pursuing careers in public service.
  From groundbreaking scholarships to hands-on education, the Dirksen 
Congressional Center continues to advance understanding of Congress 
while forging strong partnerships nationwide. Its pioneering efforts 
have made it a cornerstone institution for those who study, teach, and 
practice American democracy.
  As we commemorate this remarkable milestone, I want to recognize the 
staff, leadership, and patrons of the Dirksen Congressional Center for 
their dedication, vision, and enduring service to our Nation.
  I congratulate the Dirksen Congressional Center on 50 years of 
advancing civics, scholarship, and public service. May the next 50 
years strengthen its vital mission of connecting Americans to their 
Congress and history.
today I honor the courageous and 
selfless lives of two Tremonton-Garland police officers, Sergeant Lee 
Sorensen and Officer Eric Estrada, who were tragically killed in the 
line of duty on Sunday, August 17, 2025. These brave men put on their 
uniform each day aware of the risks involved, and today we honor the 
depth of their sacrifice.
  Sergeant Lee Sorensen dedicated 17 years of his life to serving his 
community on the police force. His tireless commitment to the people 
around him has been recognized throughout the community, earning him 
and his wife Garland Citys Wheelon Award for significantly impacting 
the city. He also received the Distinguished Service Award from the 
Tremonton Fire Department in February for his dedication, support, 
professionalism, and commitment to excellence in assisting fire and EMS 
units during incidents. When he wasnt providing critical support for 
fellow first responders, he was assisting the middle school resource 
officer and checking on the teenagers who loved to chat with him. 
Sergeant Sorensen was recently promoted to Sergeant and would have been 
sworn in today. Friday, August 22, 2025. He is remembered by his 
neighbors as humorous, kind, and a true hero. He is survived by his 
wife Lanette and their children.
  Officer Eric Estrada devoted 8 of his 31 years of life to the police 
force serving the Logan, Box Elder, and North Park police departments 
before joining the Tremonton police force earlier this year. Although 
he was only with Tremonton for less than a year, he quickly formed a 
reputation and legacy of warmth and dedication. His favorite part of 
working in law enforcement was being on patrol, where he loved 
interacting directly with the people he served and engaging with the 
community. Officer Estrada is remembered as a dedicated father and 
husband, deeply loving and cherishing his family. He is survived by his 
wife Brittney and their two children.
  Both Utah heroes were honored by thousands of people in a procession 
across Northern Utah earlier this week. It is through the service and 
sacrifice of honorable public servants such as Sergeant Sorensen and 
Officer Estrada that our communities, cities, and Nation can live 
safely.
  I extend my deepest condolences to the loved ones, fellow officers, 
and entire community that feels this loss so profoundly. I am thankful 
to both Sergeant Lee Sorensen and Officer Eric Estrada, well as their 
families, for their sacrifice and the many years dedicated to the 
betterment and safety of their communities.
I rise today to honor a true American hero, 
Sergeant Rohn Hultgren of Palm Beach County, Florida. Sgt. Hultgren is 
a father, husband, soldier, and public servant whose courage on the 
battlefield and commitment to my community deserves our recognition.
  During his service in Afghanistan, Sgt. Hultgrens convoy was struck 
by an improvised explosive device. The blast left him with a broken 
femur and a traumatic brain injury. As a result, Sgt. Hultgren 
underwent extensive speech therapy, but he never wavered in his 
devotion to our Nation or his fellow soldiers. For his sacrifice and 
bravery, he was awarded the Purple Heart.
, Sgt. Hultgren did not allow any of his injuries to 
define his life here at home. After being honorably discharged from the 
Army as a Sergeant E-5, he dedicated himself to serving other veterans 
in Floridas 21st Congressional District. Today, as Veteran Services 
Manager for the Palm Beach County Division of Senior and Veteran 
Services, Sgt.

Hultgren continues his mission by ensuring that our veterans receive 
the support they fought for. Sgt. Hultgren has been with Veteran 
Services for seven years, and he has been manager for three of those 
years. Everyone hes served knows that hes gone above and beyond for 
our nation and community. His wife of 22 years and their three children 
all reside in my community, and we are proud of their familys faith 
and resilience.
, on behalf of the people of my community, I am proud to 
recognize and honor Sgt. Rohn Hultgren for his service and continued 
dedication to the men and women who wore our Nations uniform.
HONORING THE 50TH ANNIVERSARY OF BRUCE SPRINGSTEENS ``BORN TO RUN
I rise today to commemorate the 50th 
anniversary of one of the most iconic albums in American music history, 
Born to Run by Bruce Springsteen. Released on August 25, 1975, this 
landmark album did more than launch a young songwriter from Long 
Branch, New Jersey into stardom; it became the soundtrack for countless 
Americans and an anthem for all those blessed to call New Jersey home.
  Songs like ``Thunder Road, ``Jungleland, and the titular ``Born 
to Run demonstrate Springsteens unmatched ability to blend vivid 
storytelling set in the incredible mosaic that is New Jersey with the 
generational musical talent of the E Street Band. Born to Run has stood 
the test of time and is remembered today as a timeless masterpiece 
about our daily struggles and chasing our dreams no matter the odds.
  Over the past five decades, Bruce Springsteen has become more than 
just an iconic artist. He is a staple of American culture. Known as 
``The Boss, he has sold more than 150 million records, won 20 Grammy 
Awards, and been awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom. His 
philanthropic efforts supporting food banks, veteran organizations, and 
anti-poverty initiatives reflect the values of compassion, solidarity 
and looking after each other that have always been the foundation of 
his music. And even with all of his success, you can still find him 
near the streets, venues, boardwalks and people that shaped him and his 
music.
, the 50th anniversary of Born to Run is not just a 
celebration of an album, it is a recognition of Bruce Springsteens 
enduring impact on our country. For more than half a century he has 
given voice to the struggles and aspirations of the people we encounter 
in all our lives--the dreamers and the believers, the down-but-not-out, 
and the men and women whose stars may have faded but still burn inside 
them. But perhaps what separates Springsteen from his peers is that he 
continues to create music that captures the moment and times we are in.
  On behalf of the people of New Jerseys Eighth Congressional 
District, and the millions of Springsteen fans worldwide, it is a 
privilege to honor this important anniversary and to thank him for all 
his contributions to our country, and most notably, to the great Garden 
State.
I rise today to recognize the life and 
work of Southwest Virginia racing icon Larry McClure, who passed away 
on June 25 at the age of 81.
  On March 21, 1944, Mr. McClure was born in the Harmon, Virginia, 
community, located in Buchanan County. After moving to Chilhowie in 
Smyth County during his childhood, Mr. McClure began to develop a 
passion for automobiles and racing.
  His years-long interest in cars eventually culminated in the co-
founding of McClure Motor Sales. Along with his brother Ed, the 
McClures started the automobile business with great spirits and 
motivation.
  In 1980, Mr. McClure helped lead an effort with Tim Morgan to open 
Morgan McClure Chevrolet in Coeburn, Virginia. Later in 1983, Mr. 
McClure joined forces with his brothers and Mr. Morgan in the founding 
of legendary auto racing team Morgan-McClure Motorsports.
  Many long-time residents of Southwest Virginia remember the era of 
dominance under Mr. McClures leadership in the 1990s.
  Morgan-McClure Motorsports secured its very first win close to home, 
at none other than the Bristol Motor Speedway. Despite legendary driver 
Dale Earnhardt leading the pack for a majority of the Busch 500, 
Morgan-McClure racer Ernie Irvan pulled ahead for the win.
  Following this 1990 victory, Morgan-McClure Motorsports continued to 
win.
  The next year, Morgan-McClure Motorsports won NASCARs ``Crown 
Jewel by finishing in first place at the Daytona 500 and beating some 
of NASCARs finest.
  Most notably, Morgan-McClure Motorsports took home back-to-back 
Daytona 500 titles in 1994 and 1995, cementing the team as a powerhouse 
in the sport.
  Between 1990 and 1998, Morgan-McClure Motorsports won 14 races at the 
NASCAR cup level. Mr. McClure favored drivers that were not afraid to 
take risks and captivated audiences with the famous No. 4 Kodak 
Chevrolet. Despite most teams being based around Charlotte, Mr. McClure 
was proud of his roots in Virginia and found great joy in running his 
team out of Washington County.
  While many associate Mr. McClure with racing excellence, others 
remember Mr. McClure for his compassion and humility. In 2004, fellow 
Virginian and opposing driver Hermie Sadlers only engine gave out at 
Chicagoland. Without hesitation, Mr. McClure gave Sadler a spare 
engine.
  Sterling Martin, who spent multiple years driving for Morgan-McClure 
Motorsports and won the 1994 and 1995 Daytona 500 events, attributed 
his racing success to Mr. McClure. After McClures passing, Martin 
shared how much Mr. McClure meant to him. He described McClure as 
``innovative, smart and a hell of a guy.
58 years, Ginny; 
brothers Ed (Lee), Teddy (Sarah), Jerry (Sue), and Gerald (Ruth), all 
of Abingdon; Jim of Chevy Chase, Maryland; and Michael of Florida; 
sister Betsy (Roy) of Las Vegas; sister-in-law Wilma; along with many 
aunts, uncles, nieces, nephews, and special friends. He also leaves 
behind his cherished fur baby, Prissy.
  Today, we recognize Mr. McClures impact on NASCAR and his influence 
in Southwest Virginia. As a lifelong native of the region, we will 
forever celebrate the accolades and feats of a NASCAR legend from 
Southwest Virginia.
I rise today to recognize the impressive 
efforts of Clackamas Community College President Tim Cook, who ran more 
than 1,400 miles over 52 days to raise money and awareness for Oregon 
students. His journey, which started on the Oregon-Idaho border, 
visited each of the states 17 community colleges. Averaging roughly a 
marathon a day. Tim worked to bring attention to the many challenges 
students face, including food insecurity, homelessness, and lack of 
childcare.
  I am truly impressed by Tims work, dedication, and drive. I could 
not be prouder to represent the school he leads. I look forward to 
continuing to fight for strong education policies together. Way to go.
I rise today to recognize Officer 
Christina ORear on her retirement after 30 years of distinguished 
service in law enforcement.
  Officer ORear earned both an associates degree in Law Enforcement 
and a bachelors degree in Criminal Justice from Lamar University. She 
holds the designation of Master Peace Officer and has completed more 
than 2,500 hours of training. Throughout her career, she has been 
recognized with multiple certifications, awards, and commendations for 
her professionalism and dedication.
  Since joining the Grapevine Police Department, Officer ORear has 
served her community with distinction in numerous roles, including 
Patrol Officer, Detective, Victim Liaison, and member of the Honor 
Guard. She has also contributed as a Task Force Officer with the 
Tarrant County Narcotics Task Force and the Drug Enforcement 
Administration.
  Beyond her investigative and enforcement duties, she has provided 
critical support as a Peer Support, CISM, and Mental Health 
Coordinator, roles that reflect her compassion for both her colleagues 
and the community she served. She currently serves as Co-Regional 
Director of the Texas Crisis Intervention Association and as Regional 
Director of the Texas Law Enforcement Peer Network.
  As Officer ORear retires at the end of August, we celebrate a career 
defined by integrity, service, and leadership. I thank Officer 
Christina ORear for her three decades of outstanding service to the 
Grapevine community and to the State of Texas.
I include in the Record the 
following proclamation commemorating the Multi-Year Reunion of Amanda 
Elzy High School located in Greenwood, Mississippi, and recognizing the 
pivotal role it played in the Civil Rights Movement.

       Whereas the House of Representatives joins the graduates of 
     Amanda Elzy High School and the citizens of Mississippi in 
     honoring the school on occasion of its multi-class reunion;
       Whereas Amanda Elzy High School is named in honor of Dr. 
     Amanda Elzy, a distinguished educator and trailblazer who 
     helped cofound Mississippi Valley State University and was 
     the first Black woman to serve as Assistant Superintendent of 
     the Leflore County School System;
       Whereas Amanda Elzy High School, located in the heart of 
     the Mississippi Delta in Greenwood, Mississippi, stands as a 
     beacon of resilience, education, and racial progress since 
     its founding in 1959;
       Whereas, the schools establishment followed a 
     consequential moment in the Civil Rights Movement, 
     symbolizing the demand for equality in education and the 
     enduring pursuit of justice in Leflore County and beyond;
       Whereas the legacy of Amanda Elzy High School lives on 
     through its alumni-many of whom have remained in Mississippi 
     and work tirelessly to improve their communities, including 
     through civic engagement, grassroots organizing, and 
     philanthropic leadership;
       Whereas more than 130 alumni from the graduating classes of 
     the 1960s, 1970s, and 1980s are expected to gather for the 
     Amanda Elzy Multi-Year Reunion, to be held on August 28-29, 
     2025, at the Leflore County Civic Center;
       Whereas this reunion not only honors the rich legacy of 
     Amanda Elzy High School but also seeks to highlight the 
     schools uncertain future due to funding challenges-making 
     this celebration both a joyful and urgent call to preserve an 
     institution that has served generations.
       Now, therefore, be it Resolved, that the House of 
     Representatives commemorates and honors the Amanda Elzy High 
     School Multi-Year Reunion and the alumni for their lifelong 
     commitment to education, community, and the values of 
     progress and equity that the school embodies.
I rise today to honor the exceptional 
dedication and service of Sheriff Charles Foster of Wythe County, 
Virginia, who retired on August 1 after a 38-year career in law 
enforcement.
  Through nearly four decades, Sheriff Foster has served Wythe County 
Sheriffs Office with the integrity and devotion of a true public 
servant.
  Hired at the age of 18 as a dispatcher, Sheriff Foster developed 
strong ties to those he worked with early in his career and earned high 
marks from his community.
  After more than 30 years serving the Sheriffs Office, Mr. Foster ran 
for Wythe County Sheriff in 2021. Given community support of his law 
enforcement experience and credentials, it was no surprise that he won 
the election, unopposed.
  In 2023, Wythe County reaffirmed their trust in Sheriff Foster by re-
electing him Sheriff. For the past four years in the role, Sheriff 
Foster led his department with humility, professionalism, and a 
profound sense of duty to his community.
  My office appreciated working with Sheriff Foster during his tenure. 
Thanks to his help and the Wythe County Sheriffs Office, they provide 
a room for my staff to hold traveling staff office hours and provide 
services to constituents.
  Southwest Virginia communities are served and represented by 
dedicated law enforcement professionals like Sheriff Foster. Aspiring 
officers and fellow law enforcement groups should be inspired by his 
legacy, defined by a deep personal calling to protect and serve. As 
Sheriff Foster begins this next chapter, we offer him our heartfelt 
thanks for his decades of service and his unwavering protection of his 
fellow Southwest Virginians.
today I wish to recognize the 
Federation of Indian Associations (FIA) as it commemorates Indias 78 
years of independence. Since FIAs establishment in 1970, its mission 
has been to serve the Indian-American community, promote Indian 
cultural heritage, and advance bilateral ties between the United States 
and India.
  Over the course of five decades, FIA has organized numerous outreach 
events to provide community support and to celebrate Indian culture and 
heritage. FIAs efforts have included consular document service 
assistance for over 11,000 community members, cultural dance 
competitions that have engaged over 19,000 children in celebration of 
their heritage, and an annual Diwali Soup Kitchen, which has 
successfully distributed thousands of meals throughout the Northeastern 
United States. Furthermore, FIA helped to distribute personal 
protective equipment and hot meals to first responders and community 
members during the COVID-19 pandemic.
, I honor the dedicated work of FIA to serve and uplift 
the Indian-American community, sustain the legacy of Indian heritage 
across generations, and foster cross-cultural cooperation and 
understanding. FIAs activities benefit all the communities in which 
its members reside, and for that, we are all grateful.
I rise today to remember Phillip Douglas 
Morgan of Flora, Mississippi. Phillip Morgan was a Mississippian 
through and through who gave back to his community and loved his 
family. Meeting people was a passion of Phillips, and he never met a 
stranger. Phillip grew up in rural Mississippi and was a graduate of 
Mississippi schools. He studied accounting at the University of 
Southern Mississippi and had a 10-year career as an accountant. Hired 
by Southern Ag Credit to work as their Chief Financial and Operating 
Officer, Phillip worked his way to CEO in 2020. He took his skills and 
passion of people and saw the Southern Ag Credit team as his extended 
family.
  Phillip was a family man who spent time with his wife Christy and his 
two daughters at their hunting club, cheered his daughters on in horse 
shows and cheer camps, and also enjoyed vacationing with extended 
family.
  With a passion for fostering rescue horses, Phillip worked closely 
with the MS Horse Rescue. His support for the Dixie National Rodeo, 
Ducks Unlimited, and Heart of the Horse were passion projects of his. 
Phillip will be greatly missed by his family, friends, and the Southern 
Ag Credit family. I was honored to have had the opportunity to work 
alongside him through the years. His dedication to the Ag industry will 
continue through his legacy.