HONORING BRAD BARNES RETIREMENT AS PRESIDENT OF THE FORT WORTH STOCK 
                                of texas
I rise today to honor Mr. Brad 
Barnes in his retirement from serving as President of the Stock Show 
and Rodeo in Fort Worth, Texas. The Stock Show and Rodeo is the citys 
oldest and largest annual event, gathering millions of visitors every 
year. Showcasing both professional rodeo athletes and thousands of kids 
from across Texas, this event continues to reflect Fort Worths rich 
cultural heritage.
  In his many years with the Stock Show and Rodeo, Mr. Barnes 
volunteered before becoming a full-time employee in 2004. During this 
time, the rodeo moved from the historic Will Rogers Coliseum to Dickies 
Arena. Payout winnings for contestants grew to 1.5 million dollars and 
expanded the attendance rate exponentially. Always looking ahead, he 
has prepared the initiative to renovate the Will Rogers Coliseum in 
pursuit of preserving its historical significance to Fort Worth.
  Since 1985, premiums, scholarships, and grants for Texas youth have 
accumulated over 100 million dollars. Under the leadership of Mr. 
Barnes, the 2025 Junior Sale of Champions alone raised more than 10 
million dollars. The Fort Worth Stock Show and Rodeo represents the 
cultural heart of Fort Worth, starting from the early days on the 
Chisholm Trail driving cattle to now being a symbol of where ``The West 
Begins. Mr. Barnes has worked tirelessly to preserve Fort Worths 
connection to its origin, believing that without it, it will just be 
another city on the list of many in Texas.
  On behalf of the 12th Congressional District of Texas, it is an honor 
to recognize Mr. Brad Barness humble commitment to the Fort Worth 
community. I wish the best to him and his family as they celebrate his 
retirement and continue to be committed members of the community.
I rise today to honor Eagle 
Mountain Saginaw Independent School District for its outstanding 
achievement in winning the Caudill Award. This prestigious 
architectural honor is presented by the Texas Association of School 
Boards to recognize the best educational facility in Texas. The Dr. Jim 
F. Chadwell Administration Building and the Discovery Lab Learning 
Center received this award for their exceptional planning and 
innovative design in fostering an excellent learning environment.
  Designed by VLK Architects, an innovative firm based in Fort Worth, 
these buildings have been recognized for their nature-infused, forward-
thinking architecture. Situated near Marine Creek Lake, the facilities 
seamlessly incorporate the surrounding natural landscape, featuring 
trails through scenic woods, prairies, and waterways. At the Discovery 
Lab, students can explore the environment firsthand, collect scientific 
samples, and bring them back to the labs for further study. 
Additionally, the administrative building represents a significant 
upgrade, consolidating multiple smaller structures into one state-of-
the-art facility. Housing 17 administrative departments and 150 
employees, this campus sets a new standard for Texas public school 
infrastructure.
  These remarkable centers for education are named in honor of esteemed 
local educators who have dedicated decades of their lives to the 
districts students. The administration building bears the name of Dr. 
Jim F. Chadwell, who served as superintendent for 14 years. Under his 
leadership, the district passed two bond measures totaling over $1 
billion and expanded from 23 schools serving 16,600 students to 31 
schools with a student body of 23,800. The Discovery Lab buildings 
honor Jane Weaver and David Prince, two of the districts distinguished 
educators, who have devoted decades of their careers to teaching 
outdoor education.
  On behalf of the 12th Congressional District of Texas, I am proud to 
recognize Eagle Mountain-Saginaw ISD for earning the prestigious 
Caudill Award. This recognition is a testament to the districts 
dedication to excellence in education. The community is fortunate to 
have such an innovative facility that supports students, educators, and 
administrators alike. The Caudill Award is a well-deserved honor and a 
valuable addition to an already thriving school system.
HONORING EAST HARTFORDS PATRICK AGYEMANG: FROM PARKS AND RECREATION TO 
                      THE U.S. MENS NATIONAL TEAM
it is my great honor to 
celebrate the remarkable achievements of East Hartfords own Patrick 
Agyemang, who recently joined the U.S. Mens National Team. From being 
named a 2017 All-Conference soccer player while at East Hartford High 
School, to playing soccer for my alma mater, Eastern Connecticut State 
University, to his new position on the USMNT, Patricks hometown has 
watched with pride as he represents the best of our community.
  The following article by Steven Goff, originally published in The 
Washington Post and republished in our local paper, The East Hartford 
Gazette, encapsulates Patricks journey from spectator to soccer star:

       Patrick Agyemang was 9 when he found his seat at Rentschler 
     Field in East Hartford to watch the U.S. mens national 
     soccer team play one of its final tune-ups for the 2010 World 
     Cup.
       He lived a few minutes from the stadium in a working-class 
     home the family called ``the Headquarters--the place where 
     he and his two brothers, parents and friends enjoyed most of 
     their time together.
       With his participation and passion in the sport swelling, 
     Patrick couldnt wait for kickoff against the Czech Republic. 
     He stared out and saw Clint Dempsey, Landon Donovan and other 
     stars pass through the players tunnel and in that moment 
     tried seeing himself someday making that walk in U.S. colors.
       ``Its funny, because I still kind of remember how I 
     felt, he said Tuesday. ``It was a sense of excitement, and 
     I was like: `This is where I want to be. I dont know how, 
     but I would love to be on that field, to play for the country 
     this game and watch me. 
       Almost 15 years have passed, and Agyemang is in a U.S. 
     uniform--not preparing for a World Cup but making gains with 
     the national team after climbing the ladder as a relative 
     unknown from NCAA Division III to Division I, to MLSs 
     developmental league, then to MLS with Charlotte FC, where 
     last year he made the league minimum ($71,401).
       In his first appearance for the national program at any 
     level, Agyemang started and scored the second U.S. goal 
     Saturday during a 3-1 victory over Venezuela in Fort 
     Lauderdale, Florida.
       Agyemang (pronounced Aaw-jee-mawn) earned his place this 
     month after scoring a team best 10 goals in MLS last year. On 
     Saturday, the 24-year-old forward was among eight players to 
     make their U.S. debut.
       ``There was a level of uncertainty, just because Ive never 
     been in an environment like this, Agyemang said of his 
     first camp. ``I just wanted to come in being myself, 
     completely myself, and, showing it on and off the field. I 
     think I was able to do that, but the guys and the coaching 
     staff made it way more easy than I expected and just made it 
     an experience I wont forget.
       Patrick Agyemang had never been invited to a U.S. camp at 
     any level until this month.
       Agile and 6-foot-4, Agyemang displayed qualities in the 
     open field and on set pieces Saturday. He drew a penalty kick 
     less than two minutes into the match--Matko Miljevic failed 
     to convert--and proved dangerous on the counterattack.
       ``I think he can be very, very, very useful, Pochettino 
     said. ``Hes still young, still has room to improve. . . . I 
     am so happy with him. His performance was really good. Hes 
     sometimes we were missing a little bit. Its a very good 
     alternative.
       Over the years, the U.S. program has employed tall center 
     backs and goalkeepers but few towering forwards. Agyemang 
     sprouted five inches before his junior year in high school 
     and kept growing.
       ``Hes apparently 6-4, but I think hes like 6-6, said 
     U.S. left back DeJuan Jones, who has played against Agyemang 
     in MLS. ``Hes got the Height--tough to mark on corners, for 
     sure--and then hes very quick and agile, and his holdup play 
     is nice as well. Its nice to be on his team for once. One to 
     watch out for.
       Agyemangs parents emigrated from Ghana and juggled 
     multiple jobs while raising three children. Soccer was 
     central to their upbringing with neighborhood games, school 
     teams and youth leagues.
       During World Cups, family and friends gathered to watch the 
     Black Stars, Ghanas national team. In 2006, 2010 and 2014, 
     the United States and Ghana faced each other at the World 
     Cup, with the Black Stars winning the first two.
       ``I remember 2010 I was actually at one of my teammates 
     house, Agyemang said. ``We were having a pool party. All 
     the parents were in the living room. Whoever scores, theyll 
     scream, then the other group will scream. It was a lot 
     because it was a diverse place. I think I was rooting for 
     both.
       Despite excelling for his high school and club, he did not 
     receive any offers from NCAA Division I or II programs. He 
     landed at Eastern Connecticut State. Agyemang was the 
     leagues rookie of the year.
HONORING JEFF DeWITTS RETIREMENT FROM THE FORT WORTH FIRE DEPARTMENT
I rise today to honor Mr. Jeffrey 
L. DeWitt on his retirement from the Fort Worth Fire Department after 
37 years of dedication and service to the City of Fort Worth. Founded 
152 years ago, the Fort Worth Fire Department is a nationally 
recognized agency with a rich history of serving and protecting the 
13th-largest city in the nation.
  Born and raised in Upstate New York, Mr. DeWitt moved to Texas as 
quickly as he could. He became one of the first paid firefighters with 
the Keller Fire Department in the early 1980s. He joined the Fort Worth 
Fire Department on May 6, 1988, as a full-time commissioned firefighter 
in Class 41. Over his career, he served in four stations, including the 
historic Downtown Station 1, where he was assigned on December 12, 
1997. The following year, he was promoted to Engineer at Station 1. 
During this time, he had the honor of driving ``The Big One, the 
largest engine at the Fort Worth Fire Department for 13 years--a fact 
his young daughters proudly shared, saying, ``Dad drives the big truck 
downtown.
  In addition to his many years with the Fort Worth Fire Department, he 
has spent nearly two decades instructing classes at the Fire Academy at 
Tarrant County College. As an instructor for both new recruits and 
continuing certification courses for commissioned firefighters, his 
positive impact extends to other fire departments across the State of 
Texas.
  Now, as he retires from Station 35 in the critical Fort Worth 
Alliance Airport Corridor, Mr. DeWitt holds the distinction of being 
the departments senior-most engineer and a certified Aircraft Rescue 
and Fire Fighting (ARFF) firefighter.
Throughout

his many years of service, he has worked tirelessly to protect others 
before himself. He will undoubtedly continue to embrace the spirit of a 
dedicated first responder and an engaged member of our Fort Worth 
community. I know he is looking forward to well-earned time with his 
family and first grandchild.
  On behalf of the 12th Congressional District of Texas, it is an honor 
to recognize Mr. Jeffrey L. DeWitts service to the Fort Worth Fire 
Department and his impact on keeping our community safe for the past 37 
years. I wish him and his family the very best as they celebrate his 
retirement.
I rise to honor Mr. Keith H. Johnson. 
As Chief Keith Johnson prepares to retire this month, I rise to honor 
his distinguished career and service to the Loudoun County Fire and 
Rescue System.
  Chief Johnson is a fourth-generation firefighter who began his fire 
service in 1982. His career led him to the Fairfax County Fire and 
Rescue Department, where he ascended to the rank of Deputy Chief in 
2009. After more than 30 years of service in Fairfax County, Chief 
Johnson was appointed as the Assistant Chief of Operations with Loudoun 
County Fire and Rescue and, later, the Chief of the Loudoun County Fire 
and Rescue System in 2018. He possesses both Fire Inspector and Fire 
Investigator certifications with the Virginia Department of Fire 
Programs.
  During his tenure, he led a department of nearly 500 career and more 
than 1,500 volunteer personnel, oversaw the implementation of a 
collective bargaining ordinance, created a 24 hour Operational Shift 
Commander program, and formed a behavioral health section. He also 
advocated for benefits and protections to include increased behavioral 
health benefits and cancer protections for first responders, as well as 
for the inclusion of fire sprinkler systems in residential homes.
  Chief Johnson was recently named the Career Fire Chief of the Year in 
2024. He continues to serve as Chair of the Governors appointed 
Virginia Fire Services and on Virginias Board of Housing and Community 
Development.
  Congratulations to Chief Johnson on an exceptional career. I thank 
him for decades of service to our community, and I wish him well in his 
retirement.
it is with great respect and admiration that 
I rise today to congratulate Reverend Father Theodore ``Ted Poteres, 
Proistamenos of Saints Constantine and Helen Greek Orthodox Cathedral 
in Merrillville, Indiana, on his retirement. For his twenty-eight years 
of leadership and unwavering devotion to the parish and to his 
community, Father Ted will be honored at a retirement celebration on 
May 18, 2025, at Saints Constantine and Helen Banquet Center.
  Reverend Father Ted Poteres was ordained in 1984 and began his career 
as parish priest of Saints Constantine and Helen in Rockford, Illinois, 
where he served for more than ten years. In 1997, he became the priest 
at Saints Constantine and Helen in Merrillville, Indiana. For his 
outstanding career in the priesthood spanning a remarkable forty-one 
years, Father Ted is worthy of the highest praise.
  Throughout his noteworthy career, Father Ted has worked tirelessly to 
support those most in need throughout the region. Under his direction 
at the cathedral in Merrillville, the churchs ministries have 
continued to grow and expand. These programs include the Angel Tree 
program, the Harvest for Hungry program, winter clothing drives, back-
to-school supply drives, hosting the Ross Township food pantry, and 
supporting the AHEPA low-income senior housing residents. In addition 
to his ministry efforts, providing his parishioners and the community 
with spiritual guidance has always been of the utmost importance to 
Father Ted, and he has done so with absolute integrity and grace. He 
has worked diligently to counsel his parishioners and the surrounding 
community on issues such as alcohol and drug abuse, child abuse, 
suicide, cancer, HIV and AIDS, grief, marriage counseling, and youth 
concerns.
  Outside of his tireless work at the cathedral, Father Ted gives of 
his time and effort to numerous charitable endeavors within the 
community. He also serves on boards and committees for several 
organizations including the Chicago Metropolis for Jewish-Christian 
Dialogue, the Chicago Metropolis Youth Retreat Camps, the Northwest 
Indiana Orthodox Clergy Association, and the Merrillville Clergy 
Association, among others.
, I ask that you and my distinguished colleagues join me 
in honoring Reverend Father Ted Poteres for his extraordinary 
leadership at Saints Constantine and Helen Greek Orthodox Cathedral in 
Merrillville, Indiana, and to wish him well upon his retirement. For 
his lifetime of service to others and dedication to providing spiritual 
guidance and support to those most in need, Father Ted serves as an 
inspiration to us all.
I was attending the Space Symposium as a 
result of my duties as Chairman of the Committee on Science, Space, and 
Technology.
  Had I been present, I would have voted: YEA on Roll Call No. 89, and 
YEA on Roll Call No. 90.
I rise today to recognize Carlos Alberto 
Gutierrez Pachecho for earning the Arvada Wheat Ridge Service 
Ambassadors for Youth Award.
  Carlos has overcome many challenges along his journey to success, 
demonstrating perseverance at every step. Students who strive to make 
the most of their education, like Carlos, develop crucial skills and a 
work ethic that will guide them for the rest of their lives. This award 
is a testament to Carloss hard work, determination, and perseverance 
at Drake Middle School and is clearly just the beginning of a bright 
and promising future.
  It is my honor to congratulate Carlos Alberto Gutierrez Pachecho on 
achieving the Arvada Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth Award.
RECOGNIZING CONSTITUENTS OF MINNESOTAS THIRD CONGRESSIONAL DISTRICT 
                              of minnesota
I rise today to recognize several 
constituents in Minnesotas Third Congressional District. Their 
dedication to promoting democracy is to be commended. I recognize 
Sharon Billings, Caitlin Cahill, Keith Engel, Aditi Ginuga, Anne 
Leland, Cathy Olson, Dave Olson, Paula Ramaley, Cole Roepke, Adaline 
Shinkle, Brad Shinkle, Diane Sjolander, and Anita Smithson.
  The people of Minnesotas Third Congressional District are fortunate 
to have them as neighbors, friends, and community members.
I rise today to recognize James Millard 
for earning the Arvada Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth Award.
  James has overcome many challenges along his journey to success, 
demonstrating perseverance at every step. Students who strive to make 
the most of their education, like James, develop crucial skills and a 
work ethic that will guide them for the rest of their lives. This award 
is a testament to Jamess hard work, determination, and perseverance at 
Drake Middle School and is clearly just the beginning of a bright and 
promising future.
  It is my honor to congratulate James Millard on achieving the Arvada 
Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth Award.
I rise today to recognize and celebrate 
the remarkable achievements of Michelle Smith-McDonald, who has been 
elected to the Naismith Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame as a recipient 
of the 2025 Curt Gowdy Media Award. Her induction into the Hall of Fame 
stands as a testament to her decades-long commitment to advancing 
womens sports journalism and her influential voice within the world of 
basketball.
  A trailblazer in her field, Michelle Smith-McDonald became ESPN.coms 
first-ever regular womens basketball columnist in the 1990s. Over her 
distinguished career, she has covered womens professional and 
collegiate sports for some of the Nations most prominent outlets, 
including ESPN, the San Francisco Chronicle, AOL Fanhouse, and espnW. 
Her dedication to elevating womens sports through insightful reporting 
and compelling storytelling has spotlighted generations of athletes, 
coaches, and programs, contributing to the growth and visibility of 
womens sports nationwide.
  Michelles contributions extend beyond her work as a journalist. She 
also has demonstrated her leadership and service in public relations at 
San Jose State University and the Alameda County Office of Education. 
Her dedication to public service further includes her tenure as an 
elected official on the Zone 7 Water Agency Board of Directors.
  The Naismith Basketball Hall of Fame has rightly recognized Michelle 
Smith-McDonald as a trailblazer and visionary whose work has broadened 
opportunities and raised the profile of womens sports. As a resident 
of the Bay Area for over three decades, Michelle also has celebrated 
and supported the talent emerging from local programs like Stanford, 
Cal, and the newly launched Golden State Valkyries of the WNBA.
  It is my honor to acknowledge Michelle Smith-McDonalds induction 
into the Basketball Hall of Fame and to commend her for her lifelong 
dedication to sports journalism, advocacy, and service. She has left an 
indelible mark on the world of basketball and inspired countless 
individuals along the way. We join her friends, family, colleagues, and 
admirers in celebrating this extraordinary achievement.
I rise today to recognize Sarbelio 
Guevara Gonzalez for earning the Arvada Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors 
for Youth Award.
  Sarbelio has overcome many challenges along his journey to success, 
demonstrating perseverance at every step. Students who strive to make 
the most of their education, like Sarbelio, develop crucial skills and 
a work ethic that will guide them for the rest of their lives. This 
award is a testament to Sarbelios hard work, determination, and 
perseverance at Drake Middle School and is clearly just the beginning 
of a bright and promising future.
  It is my honor to congratulate Sarbelio Guevara Gonzalez on achieving 
the Arvada Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth Award.
I rise today to recognize Tasia Howard 
for earning the Arvada Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth Award.
  Tasia has overcome many challenges along her journey to success, 
demonstrating perseverance at every step. Students who strive to make 
the most of their education, like Tasia, develop crucial skills and a 
work ethic that will guide them for the rest of their lives. This award 
is a testament to Tasias hard work, determination, and perseverance at 
Drake Middle School and is clearly just the beginning of a bright and 
promising future.
  It is my honor to congratulate Tasia Howard on achieving the Arvada 
Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth Award.