Title IV of Senate Resolution 4, agreed to by the Senate of February 
4, 1977, calls for establishment of a system for a computerized 
schedule of all meetings and hearings of Senate committees, 
subcommittees, joint committees, and committees of conference. This 
title requires all such committees to notify the Office of the Senate 
Daily Digest--designated by the Rules Committee--of the time, place and 
purpose of the meetings, when scheduled and any cancellations or 
changes in the meetings as they occur.
  As an additional procedure along with the computerization of this 
information, the Office of the Senate Daily Digest will prepare this 
information for printing in the Extensions of Remarks section of the 
Congressional Record on Monday and Wednesday of each week.
  Meetings scheduled for Tuesday, July 29, 2025 may be found in the 
Daily Digest of todays Record.

                                JULY 30
     9:30 a.m.
       Committee on Energy and Natural Resources
         Business meeting to consider the nominations of Lanny 
           Erdos, of Ohio, to be Director of the Office of Surface 
           Mining Reclamation and Enforcement, and Audrey 
           Robertson, of Colorado, to be an Assistant Secretary 
           (Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy), and Timothy 
           John Walsh, of Colorado, to be an Assistant Secretary 
           (Environmental Management), both of the Department of 
           Energy.
                                                            SD-366
     10 a.m.
       Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs
       Subcommittee on Securities, Insurance, and Investment
         To hold hearings to examine guardrails and growth, 
           focusing on AIs role in capital and insurance markets.
                                                            SD-538
       Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation
         Business meeting to consider S. 1691, to limit the use of 
           facial recognition technology in airports, S. 2314, to 
           direct the Secretary of Commerce to establish a task 
           force regarding shark depredation, S. 2318, to amend 
           the National Institute of Standards and Technology Act 
           to require the periodic update to the strategic plan to 
           guide the Manufacturing USA Program to align with the 
           mandatory updates to the National Strategy for Advanced 
           Manufacturing, S. 2351, to supplement existing lease 
           authorities available to the Administrator of the 
           National Aeronautics and Space Administration to 
           support research, education, and training, and the 
           nominations of Neil Jacobs, of North Carolina, to be 
           Under Secretary for Oceans and Atmosphere, Taylor 
           Jordan, of the District of Columbia, to be an Assistant 
           Secretary, and Harry Kumar, of New York, to be an 
           Assistant Secretary, all of the Department of Commerce, 
           Paul Roberti, of Rhode Island, to be Administrator of 
           the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety 
           Administration, Jonathan Morrison, of California, to be 
           Administrator of the National Highway Traffic Safety 
           Administration, Seval Oz, of California, to be an 
           Assistant Secretary, Michael Rutherford, of Florida, to 
           be an Assistant Secretary, and Gregory Zerzan, of 
           Texas, to be General Counsel, all of the Department of 
           Transportation, and Derek Barrs, of Florida, to be 
           Administrator of the Federal Motor Carrier Safety 
           Administration.
                                                            SR-253
       Committee on Foreign Relations
         Business meeting to consider pending calendar business.
                                                             S-116
       Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions
         Business meeting to consider S. 2292, to amend the 
           Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act to revise and 
           extend the user fee program for over-the-counter 
           monograph drugs, S. 1440, to amend title II of the 
           Public Health Service Act to include as an additional 
           right or privilege of commissioned officers of the 
           Public Health Service (and their beneficiaries) certain 
           leave provided under title 10, United States Code to 
           commissioned officers of the Army (or their 
           beneficiaries), S. 2398, to reauthorize the Kay Hagan 
           Tick Act, S. 2301, to reauthorize certain programs 
           regarding rural health care, S. 1727, to amend the 
           Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 to 
           permit employee stock ownership plan participants to 
           benefit from the full amount of beneficial ownership 
           that can be accrued in the plan while also fully 
           realizing the benefits of saving for retirement in a 
           defined contribution plan, S. 1728, to amend the 
           Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 to 
           expand the membership of the Advisory Council on 
           Employee Welfare and Pension Benefit Plans to include 
           representatives of employee ownership organizations, 
           and S. 2403, to amend the Employee Retirement Income 
           Security Act of 1974 to provide a clear definition of 
           adequate consideration for certain closely held stock.
                                                            SD-430
       Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
         Business meeting to consider S. 854, to amend title 31, 
           United States Code, to establish the Life Sciences 
           Research Security Board, S. 855, to require executive 
           branch employees to report certain royalties, S. 269, 
           to improve coordination between Federal and State 
           agencies and the Do Not Pay working system, S. 81, to 
           require a guidance clarity statement on certain agency 
           guidance, S. 861, to streamline the sharing of 
           information among Federal disaster assistance agencies, 
           to expedite the delivery of life-saving assistance to 
           disaster survivors, to speed the recovery of 
           communities from disasters, to protect the security and 
           privacy of information provided by disaster survivors, 
           S. 766, to require an annual report of taxpayer-funded 
           projects that are over budget and behind schedule, S. 
           872, to amend the Federal Funding Accountability and 
           Transparency Act of 2006 to ensure that other 
           transaction agreements are reported to USAspending.gov, 
           S. 727, to correct the inequitable denial of enhanced 
           retirement and annuity benefits to certain U.S. Customs 
           and Border Protection Officers, S. 874, to ensure that 
           whistleblowers, including contractors, are protected 
           from retaliation when a Federal employee orders a 
           reprisal, S. 594, to amend the Post-Katrina Management 
           Reform Act of 2006 to repeal certain obsolete 
           requirements, S. 865, to amend the Lobbying Disclosure 
           Act of 1995 to require certain disclosures by 
           registrants regarding exemptions under the Foreign 
           Agents Registration Act of 1938, as amended, S. 856, to 
           amend the Lobbying Disclosure Act of 1995 to clarify a 
           provision relating to certain contents of registrations 
           under that Act, S. 850, to amend the Northern Border 
           Security Review Act to require updates to the northern 
           border threat analysis and the northern border 
           strategy, S. 848, to provide for joint reports by 
           relevant Federal agencies to Congress regarding 
           incidents of terrorism, and S. 572, to enhance the 
           effectiveness of the Shadow Wolves Program; to be 
           immediately followed by a business meeting to consider 
           S. 1498, to amend chapter 131 of title 5, United States 
           Code, to prohibit transactions involving certain 
           financial instruments by Members of Congress, S. 2144, 
           to improve the safety and security of Members of 
           Congress, immediate family members of Members of 
           Congress, and congressional staff, the nominations of 
           Pedro Allende, of Florida, to be Under Secretary for 
           Science and Technology, and Sean Plankey, of 
           Pennsylvania, to be Director of the Cybersecurity and 
           Infrastructure Security Agency, both of the Department 
           of Homeland Security, Christopher Fox, of Virginia, to 
           be Inspector General of the Intelligence Community, 
           Office of the Director of National Intelligence, and 
           Edward Aloysius OConnell, of the District of Columbia, 
           to be an Associate Judge of the Superior Court of the 
           District of Columbia for the term of fifteen years.
                                                            SD-342
     10:15 a.m.
       Committee on the Judiciary
         To hold hearings to examine certain nominations.
                                                            SH-216
     11 a.m.
       Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry
         To hold hearings to examine a review of the USDA 
           reorganization proposal.
                                                           SR-328A

     2 p.m.
       Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
       Subcommittee on Border Management, Federal Workforce, and 
           Regulatory Affairs
         To hold hearings to examine Congresss role in the 
           regulatory landscape.
                                                            SD-342
     2:30 p.m.
       Committee on Foreign Relations
       Subcommittee on Africa and Global Health Policy
         To hold hearings to examine finding opportunities for 
           U.S.-Africa partnerships.
                                                            SD-419
       Committee on the Judiciary
       Subcommittee on Privacy, Technology, and the Law
         To hold hearings to examine protecting and safeguarding 
           Americans online data.
                                                            SD-226
     3 p.m.
       Select Committee on Intelligence
         To receive a closed briefing on certain intelligence 
           matters.
                                                            SH-219
     3:30 p.m.
       Special Committee on Aging
         To hold hearings to examine awareness to action, focusing 
           on combating elder abuse and neglect.
                                                            SD-106
     4 p.m.
       Committee on Veterans Affairs
         Business meeting to consider S. 275, to improve the 
           provision of care and services under the Veterans 
           Community Care Program of the Department of Veterans 
           Affairs, S. 506, to require the Secretary of Veterans 
           Affairs to carry out a pilot program to coordinate, 
           navigate, and manage care and benefits for veterans 
           enrolled in both the Medicare program and the system of 
           annual patient enrollment of the Department of Veterans 
           Affairs, S. 607, to require the Secretary of Veterans 
           Affairs to establish an integrated project team to 
           improve the process for scheduling appointments for 
           health care from the Department of Veterans Affairs, S. 
           610, to expand the VetSuccess on Campus program of the 
           Department of Veterans Affairs, S. 635, to amend title 
           38, United States Code, to direct the Secretary of 
           Veterans Affairs to recognize nurse registries for 
           purposes of the Veterans Community Care Program, S. 
           654, to amend title 38, United States Code, to 
           establish an external provider scheduling program to 
           assist the Department of Veterans Affairs in scheduling 
           appointments for care and services under the Veterans 
           Community Care Program, S. 702, to require a study on 
           the quality of care difference between mental health 
           and addiction therapy care provided by health care 
           providers of the Department of Veterans Affairs 
           compared to non-Department providers, S. 778, to amend 
           title 38, United States Code, to require a lactation 
           space in each medical center of the Department of 
           Veterans Affairs, S. 787, to amend title 38, United 
           States Code, to establish a commission to review 
           operations at the Veterans Health Administration and 
           submit to Congress reports with respect to that review, 
           and for other programs, S. 800, to modify the Precision 
           Medicine for Veterans Initiative of the Department of 
           Veterans Affairs, S. 827, to extend and modify the 
           transportation grant program of the Department of 
           Veterans Affairs, S. 831, to amend title 38, United 
           States Code, to require the Secretary of Veterans 
           Affairs to improve telephone communication by the 
           Department of Veterans Affairs, S. 879, to expand 
           medical, employment, and other benefits for individuals 
           serving as family caregivers for certain veterans, S. 
           972, to amend title 38, United States Code, to ensure 
           that the Secretary of Veterans Affairs repays members 
           of the Armed Forces for certain contributions made by 
           such members towards Post-9/11 Educational Assistance, 
           S. 1139, to amend the Commander John Scott Hannon 
           Veterans Mental Health Care Improvement Act of 2019 to 
           modify and reauthorize the Staff Sergeant Parker Gordon 
           Fox Suicide Prevention Grant Program of the Department 
           of Veterans Affairs, S. 1245, to amend title 38, United 
           States Code, to expand health care and benefits from 
           the Department of Veterans Affairs for military sexual 
           trauma, S. 1318, to direct the American Battle 
           Monuments Commission to establish a program to identify 
           American-Jewish servicemembers buried in United States 
           military cemeteries overseas under markers that 
           incorrectly represent their religion and heritage, S. 
           1320, to direct the Secretary of Defense and the 
           Secretary of Veterans Affairs to take certain steps 
           regarding research related to menopause, perimenopause, 
           or mid-life womens health, S. 1383, to establish the 
           Veterans Advisory Committee on Equal Access, S. 1441, 
           to require the Secretary of Veterans Affairs to award 
           grants to nonprofit entities to assist such entities in 
           carrying out programs to provide service dogs to 
           eligible veterans, S. 1533, to amend title 38, United 
           States Code, to make permanent and codify the pilot 
           program for use of contract physicians for disability 
           examinations, S. 1591, to amend title 38, United States 
           Code, to reorganize the acquisition structure of the 
           Department of Veterans Affairs and to establish the 
           Director of Cost Assessment and Program Evaluation in 
           the Department, S. 2392, to increase, effective as of 
           December 1, 2025, the rates of compensation for 
           veterans with service-connected disabilities and the 
           rates of dependency and indemnity compensation for the 
           survivors of certain disabled veterans, and S. 2393, to 
           authorize a major medical facility project for the 
           Department of Veterans Affairs for fiscal year 2026 in 
           St. Louis, Missouri.
                                                            SR-418

                                JULY 31
     9:15 a.m.
       Committee on Armed Services
         To hold hearings to examine the nominations of Michael 
           Powers, of Virginia, to be Deputy Under Secretary, Amy 
           Henninger, of Virginia, to be Director of Operational 
           Test and Evaluation, David Denton, Jr., of Virginia, to 
           be General Counsel of the Department of the Navy, and 
           Benjamin Kohlmann, of Texas, to be an Assistant 
           Secretary of the Navy, all of the Department of 
           Defense.
                                                            SD-G50
     9:30 a.m.
       Committee on Appropriations
         Business meeting to markup an original bill entitled, 
           ``Department of Defense Appropriations Act, 2026, and 
           an original bill entitled, ``Departments of Labor, 
           Health and Human Services, Education, and Related 
           Agencies Appropriations Act, 2026.
                                                            SD-106
     9:45 a.m.
       Committee on Finance
         Business meeting to consider the nominations of Jonathan 
           McKernan, of Tennessee, to be an Under Secretary of the 
           Treasury, and Alex Adams, of Idaho, to be Assistant 
           Secretary for Family Support, Department of Health and 
           Human Services.
                                                            SD-215
     10 a.m.
       Committee on Finance
         To hold hearings to examine the nominations of Bryan 
           Switzer, of Virginia, to be a Deputy United States 
           Trade Representative (Asia, Textiles, Investment, 
           Services, and Intellectual Property), with the rank of 
           Ambassador, and Gustav Chiarello III, of Virginia, to 
           be an Assistant Secretary, and Michael Stuart, of West 
           Virginia, to be General Counsel, both of the Department 
           of Health and Human Services, and Derek Theurer, of 
           Virginia, to be a Deputy Under Secretary of the 
           Treasury, vice Jonathan Davidson.
                                                            SD-215
       Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions
         To hold hearings to examine making health care 
           affordable, focusing on solutions to lower costs and 
           empower patients.
                                                            SD-430
     10:15 a.m.
       Committee on the Judiciary
         Business meeting to consider the nominations of Leif 
           Olson, to be United States Attorney for the Northern 
           District of Iowa for the term of four years, and Adam 
           Sleeper, to be United States Attorney for the District 
           of the Virgin Islands for the term of four years, both 
           of the Department of Justice.
                                                            SH-216