I rise today to commemorate His Majesty 
King Maha Vajiralongkorn Phra Vajiraklaochaoyuhua of the Kingdom of 
Thailands (Rama X) 6th Cycle Birthday Anniversary on July 28, 2024, 
which marks the completion of 72 years. I would like to take this 
opportunity to offer our most heartfelt congratulations.
  I applaud His Majestys many accomplishments and contributions to the 
prosperity and welfare of the people of Thailand. Despite the many 
global challenges faced since his ascension to the throne in December 
2016, His Majesty continues to preserve and build upon the Royal legacy 
of his father, King Bhumibol Adulyadej the Great (Rama IX).
  His Majestys long-standing relationship with the United States dates 
back 64 years to June 1960 when King Rama X accompanied his father and 
Her Majesty Queen Sirikit, the Queen Mother, during a Thai royal visit 
to the United States. During his address to a joint session of the 
United States Congress, His Majestys father expressed admiration for 
the United States ability to maintain harmony among diverse peoples 
and emphasized our nations deep ties and mutual respect.
  In the 1980s, King Rama X, then the Crown Prince, completed U.S. Air 
Force (USAF) advanced fighter training and conversion courses for the 
F-5 fighter aircraft at Williams Air Force Base, Arizona, logging over 
2,000 hours of flight time. As a Marine Corps helicopter pilot myself, 
I wholeheartedly commend His Majestys aviation achievements. His 
Majestys passion and dedication to military affairs is reflected in 
the United States and the Kingdom of Thailands shared desire to 
elevate our alliance and military cooperation. The U.S. designated the 
Kingdom of Thailand as a major non-NATO ally in 2003, and the annual 
Cobra Gold Exercise remains the largest multinational military exercise 
in the Indo-Pacific region. Participating in Cobra Gold during my own 
military career was a true honor.
  The Kingdom of Thailand remains a key U.S. ally and partner in 
Southeast Asia. The U.S.-Thailand relationship is vital to the 
stability and prosperity of the Indo-Pacific region, and the Thai 
monarchy plays an integral role in cultivating this crucial 
relationship.
  Last year, the United States and the Kingdom of Thailand celebrated 
the 190th anniversary of our shared diplomatic relations, signifying 
the enduring bond of trust and collaboration established by the signing 
of the 1833 Treaty of Amity and Commerce, making the Kingdom of 
Thailand the first Asian nation to enter diplomatic relations with the 
United States. From then on, the Thai monarchy, our governments, and 
our peoples have worked to solidify and modernize our relationship and 
the unwavering alliance that we enjoy today. The anniversary was an 
opportunity to reaffirm our long-standing alliance and commitment to 
facing our shared global challenges together.

  As we celebrate these significant milestones, Im pleased to 
recognize another individual who has contributed to strengthening the 
diplomatic and cultural ties between our nations. I extend my heartfelt 
appreciation and recognition to Mr. Sribhongse Bunnag, who has rendered 
invaluable service to my constituents and my office this year in his 
capacity as a Foreign Affairs Fellow. Through Mr. Bunnags diligence 
and compassion, we have gained a deeper understanding and appreciation 
of the Thai peoples rich culture, history, and aspirations.
  But perhaps most importantly, we have gained a dear friend.
  As we look ahead, I am confident that the enduring friendship between 
our two nations will continue to prosper and grow as we rise together 
to meet the challenges of tomorrow.
  Today, I extend to His Majesty King Rama X of Thailand my sincerest 
best wishes for his good health, happiness, and long life.
I rise today to draw attention to the 
dangerous issue of deepfake pornography, which is incredibly 
destructive and can have life-altering impacts on its victims. Almost 
96 percent of all deepfakes online are pornographic in nature, and 
nearly every single one targets women. It takes no special knowledge or 
technical expertise to create these images, and more women are being 
targeted each and every day. High school students, young girls who 
should be worried about their homework, not whether a classmate is 
using their image to make an explicit video that has the potential to 
do serious and irreparable harm. Deepfakes are abhorrent, and the 
developers of these systems should be held liable. Ive introduced 
legislation to bring strong criminal and civil penalties against those 
who create them. I urge my colleagues to join me in demonstrating our 
shared commitment to fighting the dangerous misuse of artificial 
intelligence.
I rise to honor a remarkable couple 
who have been pillars of our community in Friendswood, Texas. The 
Glines Family, as some of the earliest residents of our beloved town, 
have left an indelible mark on the fabric of our society.
  Billy and Jackie Glines share a love story that reads like a 
fairytale. They met in 1957, and it wasnt long before sparks flew. 
Their first date in July of that year set the stage for a lifelong 
romance. By late October, Billy was called to serve our great country. 
Knowing he had found his soulmate, Billy was determined to marry Jackie 
before someone else did, for he knew he would ``never find another girl 
like her.
  On Christmas leave from basic training, Billy and Jackie had a quaint 
ceremony on December 23, 1957. Their love was tested early on, as Billy 
soon departed for Germany to serve as an Advanced Weapons Support 
Commander.
  Their bond only grew stronger over the miles and years. In November 
1960, they welcomed their first child, Kimberly, followed by Britt in 
April 1964. Kimberly and her husband, Stan, have two children, while 
Britt and his wife, Shannon, have three. The Glines family legacy 
continues to thrive through these wonderful families.
  Billys career journey led him to establish the Mustang Auto Shop 
with his brother-in-law, a business that remains in operation today, 
serving the Friendswood community. Jackie, after initially working at a 
weight loss facility, found her calling as a secretary at Accident 
Insurance Company from 1958 to 1960. She paused her career to raise her 
children, then dedicated 30 years as a beloved school secretary at her 
sons elementary school.
  Last Christmas, Billy and Jackie celebrated 67 years of enduring love 
and commitment. Their contributions to Friendswood are immeasurable, 
and their story is an inspiration to us all.
, it is an honor to represent folks like Billy and Jackie 
Glines, whose lives are a testament to the values we hold dear--love, 
dedication, and service. Their story is a shining example of the 
American spirit, and their enduring marriage is a beacon of hope and 
stability in our community. Heres to Billy and Jackie Glines, for 
their steadfast love, their service to our country, and their 
unwavering commitment to our community. May they continue to share many 
more happy years together.
I rise today to recognize the dedication 
ceremony for the Lieutenant Colonel James C. Warren Memorial 
Interchange. In 2015, the Interstate-80/505 Interchange was officially 
named the Lieutenant Colonel James C. Warren Memorial Interchange, yet 
a physical sign designating the recognition and new name of the 
interchange was never established.
  Lt. Col. Warren began his 35 years of service in the U.S. Air Force 
during World War II as an original member of the 477th Bombardment, 
comprised of African American military pilots known as the ``Tuskegee 
Airmen. He flew over 12,000 hours and 173 combat missions, never 
failing to answer the call to serve our country.
  As a result of his bravery and aptitude, Lt. Col. Warren was selected 
as the navigator of ``Homecoming One, bringing home the first group 
of American POWs from North Vietnam. In 1971, when Apollo 14 landed on 
Earth, he was a member of the team that safely recovered the space 
crew. Lt. Col. Warren participated in countless crucial moments in our 
history and his selfless service undeniably solidified him as an 
American hero.
  Lt. Col. Warrens service alongside his fellow Tuskegee Airman was 
critical to the Civil Rights Movement and breaking down the barriers of 
segregation in the U.S. military. In 1945, Lt. Col. Warren and the 
Tuskegee Airman attempted to integrate an all-white Officers Club at 
Freeman Army Airfield. The incident led to the arrest of 102 officers, 
including Lt. Col. Warren. This event is widely regarded as a seminal 
moment in the push toward full integration of the U.S. military and as 
a model for civil disobedience during the Civil Rights Movement.
  For his critical contributions to our country, Lt. Col. Warren was 
awarded numerous medals, including the Distinguished Flying Cross with 
two Oak Leaf Clusters, the Air Medal with eleven Oak Leaf Clusters, and 
the Congressional Gold Medal. Lt. Col. Warren dedicated his life to 
serving our country, and his bravery and tenacity helped create a 
better, more equitable society for future generations of Americans.
  I am thrilled that the dedication for the Lieutenant Colonel James C. 
Warren Memorial Interchange will finally be completed. On behalf of 
Californias Eighth Congressional District, I extend my sincere 
gratitude to Lt. Col. James C. Warren for his selfless service, 
advocacy, and tremendous impact on our country.
I rise today to honor a friend and 
a hero of the East End, Felix Z. Fraga, who passed away last week at 
the age of 94.
  Born one day after the market crash on Black Tuesday, Felixs life 
was defined by his fight to end poverty in all its forms.
  Growing up in the East End, one of Felixs foundational memories at 
the start of the Depression was going to the Rusk Settlement House, a 
community center, for a daily meal. But the Rusk House, and later 
Ripley House would become so much more than a place for food. In 1946, 
at the age of 16, Felix started as a youth social worker at Rusk, in 
what would become his lifes calling.
  The first in his family to graduate from high school and college, and 
later graduate school for social work, Felix went on to lead Ripley 
House for two decades as director from 1970 to 1990. I still remember 
walking into Ripley House in 1972, when I first arrived in Houston, a 
young social worker ready to save the world. I went there looking for a 
job--thats when I met Felix and we were friends ever since. We fought 
many battles together--hunger, homelessness, redistricting, poverty--
you name it, Felix was there.
  Felix was always a public servant, but he didnt seek out politics. 
In 1990, it was the public who chose him to be their champion, to be 
their voice. And champion them he did, Mr. Speaker. He would serve on 
the Houston Independent School District School Board and then on the 
Houston City Council, always fighting to uplift Latinos, and building 
for a better day.
, Felix Fraga was a tireless champion for justice and a 
better life for all, and he never ceased to smile even through his 
final days.
  He put hope over hunger, care over cynicism, and people over 
politics.
  Our prayers are with his wife, Nelly, his brother, Tom; his sons, 
Carlos and Bolivar; and his bright grandchildren, Nicolas, Damian, and 
Amanda.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in honoring the life and 
legacy of Felix Fraga.
I rise today to celebrate the life and 
legacy of a great American patriot, World War II hero Jack Hamlin of 
Springfield, Missouri, who passed away on July 20, 2024. He was 102 
years old.
, minor league baseball player, 
Coast Guard veteran, law school graduate, member of the Missouri House 
of Representatives from Greene County, Deputy Collector of Revenue for 
the state of Missouri, owner of an insurance company, husband, and 
father of three.
  In 1941, Jack was pursuing his dream to become a professional 
baseball player, but when the Japanese Empire attacked the U.S. fleet 
at Pearl Harbor on December 7th that year, Jack knew he had to serve. 
On February 2, 1942, he raised his right hand and enlisted in the Coast 
Guard.
  Little did Jack know that in the spring of 1944, he would be assigned 
to ``Operation Neptune, the designation for the naval operation 
supporting the largest invasion in military history code named 
Operation Overlord. His 83-foot cutter was assigned to a special unit 
of 60 cutters named ``Rescue Flotilla One. Their mission was to 
rescue soldiers lost in the water during the invasion at Normandy.
  We hear much about the men who fought and died that day, ultimately 
turning the tide of World War II. But little is known about Jacks 
efforts and the efforts of more than 800 of his fellow guardsmen who 
saved the lives of 1,500 men and one woman, pulling them from the 
chilly waters off the Normandy coast and ferrying them to the hospital 
ships some 10 miles away. It was right and fitting that he was 
presented with the French Legion of Honor medal for his efforts. He 
also was one of only 75 American military members to be invited to

have dinner with the Queen of England in commemoration of D-Days 50th 
anniversary.
  Jack Hamlin continued to live his life fully, even jumping out of an 
airplane at age 95, and serving his state and fellow man. He was loved 
by all who knew him, and this true American hero will be greatly 
missed.
HON. HENRY C. ``HANK JOHNSON, JR.
had I been present, I would have 
voted:
  PRES on Roll Call No. 1; YEA on Roll Call No. 6; YEA on Roll Call No. 
9; NAY on Roll Call No. 11; YEA on Roll Call No. 73; YEA on Roll Call 
No. 74; YEA on Roll Call No. 75; YEA on Roll Call No. 76; YEA on Roll 
Call No. 77; NAY on Roll Call No. 78; NAY on Roll Call No. 112; NAY on 
Roll Call No. 113; NAY on Roll Call No. 227; NAY on Roll Call No. 228; 
NAY on Roll Call No. 285; and NAY on Roll Call No. 287.
I include in the Record the following 
Proclamation in honor of the 225th anniversary of the Star Democrat 
newspaper published in Easton, Maryland.

       Whereas, the Star Democrat newspaper was first rolled off 
     the press in 1799 when The Honorable John Adams was the 
     sitting President of the United States and The Honorable 
     George Washington was still alive and living

     his final year on his plantation at Mount Vernon; and
       Whereas, the Star Democrat--originally the Republican 
     Star--was a staunch supporter of Jeffersonian democracy and 
     the ideas of The Honorable Thomas Jefferson; and
       Whereas, the newspapers original philosophy of individual 
     liberty, local autonomy and limited central government 
     continues to this day; and
       Whereas, the Star Democrat has seen the Nation survive and 
     live through numerous wars and conflicts with its offices 
     twice destroyed in fires and once wrecked by a mob of 
     vandals, while one of its editors arrested and exiled by 
     Federal troops during the Civil War; and
       Whereas, on August 21, 2024, the Star Democrat will 
     celebrate its 225th anniversary of publication.
       NOW, THEREFORE, I, Andy Harris, Member of Congress, do 
     hereby proclaim and celebrate The Star Democrat for its role 
     and service to the Maryland community and our country on its 
     225th anniversary.
I rise today to honor Michelle Reimers, who 
recently retired as General Manager of the Turlock Irrigation District 
(TID).
  TID was founded in 1887, making it the oldest irrigation district in 
California. Today, TID provides water from Don Pedro Reservoir to over 
150,000 acres of farmland in Stanislaus and Merced counties through 250 
miles of canals. It is one of only four irrigation districts in 
California that provide retail electricity to homes, farms, and 
businesses in its service territory.
  Michelle was with TID for 18 years, starting with its public 
information operation, but through hard work and dedication to the 
District, she assumed various other leadership positions, culminating 
in becoming the first female General Manager in 2020. During her time 
leading the agency, she focused on transparency, collaboration, and 
commitment to its customers, but always prioritized ensuring that TID 
had water supplies to serve its communities, such as through creating 
new water rights for the District to capture flood flows on the 
Tuolumne River. In addition, under Michelles leadership, TID 
electricity rates remained among the lowest in California, without 
wavering on reliability.
  Just three months into her role as General Manager, Michelle 
successfully navigated the most challenging pandemic of our time. 
Additionally, she led TID through extreme weather conditions, including 
the third direst three year stretch on record and then one of the 
wettest winters in history, and through significant wildfires multiple 
years in a row all the while maintaining the reliability our community 
expects and deserves. Michelle was also a driving force in the long-
term relicensing of the Don Pedro Project, a federally licensed water 
storage facility with hydroelectric energy generation on the Tuolumne 
River, with Federal Energy Regulatory Commission.
  Pragmatic and results oriented, Michelle would bring disparate groups 
together from the Environmental Defense Fund to the American Public 
Power Association to get the job done. While she encouraged 
collaboration, she never shied away from her main objective--to ensure 
our communities and farms had a reliable supply of water and power. And 
when she was not leading TID or representing the District in water-
related negotiations, she could be found growing walnuts and almonds on 
her farm.
  Michelle was a tireless advocate of our community and farmers and 
always led with the customer in mind. She should be proud of all she 
accomplished while leading TID and, as she begins this new chapter in 
her life, I am confident she will continue to make positive impacts in 
our Valley.
, I urge my colleagues to join me in recognizing a woman 
whose professionalism, passion, and determination has benefited many of 
the water and power users of Californias San Joaquin Valley. It is 
both fitting and appropriate that we honor Michelle Reimers on her 
retirement from the Turlock Irrigation District. I want to wish 
Michelle and her family all the best as she embarks on this new phase 
of life.
I rise today to recognize PointBank as it 
celebrates the 140th anniversary of its founding. Im honored to 
congratulate PointBank on reaching such a significant milestone.
  As an independent bank located in Denton County, PointBank has served 
North Texas since its founding in 1884. Over the last 140 years, 
PointBank has expanded across Denton County, providing locally owned, 
full-service, community banking. It is an honor to recognize the 
dedicated and steadfast service that they have provided to Denton 
County citizens and businesses over the past 140 years.
  After James Pierson fulfilled his vision in 1853 of establishing the 
town of Pilot Point, he and other residents realized they needed a bank 
to serve their hometowns needs. Less than 40 years after the 
organization of Denton County, the Pilot Point Bank opened its doors in 
1884, serving as the forerunner of PointBank. Just eight years later, 
on July 13, 1892, the bank received its charter as Pilot Point National 
Bank. On November 15, 1995, more than 100 years after its founding, 
Pilot Point Bank shortened its name to PointBank, as it is currently 
known today. Since its inception, PointBank has had seven presidents 
and the banks ownership has been passed down through multiple 
families. In 1981, Mr. J. Raymond David, Sr. became President of the 
bank and served in that role until 2004 when he was succeeded by his 
son, Mr. Ray David, Jr.
  Today, PointBank serves their Denton County customers from their nine 
bank locations in Argyle, Denton, Lewisville, Little Elm, Flower Mound, 
the Lake Cities, and its first location in Aubrey. PointBank has 
exciting plans for future growth and expansion to additional North 
Texas communities.
  Since its founding, PointBank has remained a locally owned, 
independent Denton County based bank that knows the area and the people 
that they serve, taking pride in being a ``people bank. I stand here 
today to celebrate with the David family and their employees, looking 
back at an exemplary 140 years of service to our community and looking 
ahead to many more years to come.
I rise today to recognize the military service 
of Sergeant Irby ``Corky Dyer III. He served during the Vietnam War 
as a member of the U.S. Armys elite Green Berets.
  Sergeant Dyer is a native Texan born in Sweetwater--where my father 
was born--on December 6, 1943. He grew up and attended public school in 
Midland. Sergeant Dyer went on to attend Schreiner Institute in 
Kerrville. He graduated from Schreiners military preparation program 
in 1961. Four years later, he married Bonnie K. Little. They have one 
daughter together, Deborah Denise.
  Before enlisting in the military, Sergeant Dyer attended college in 
Odessa and later at the University of Texas at Austin. He trained as an 
Army medic and eventually became a member of the 5th Special Forces 
Group, Detachment B-52 under Project DELTA. Their top-secret 
assignments brought Sergeant Dyer into dangerous situations in Vietnam 
and neighboring countries.
  While conducting Operation Hawkeye in December 1966, Sergeant Dyer 
and his fellow soldiers were shot down in a helicopter over Laos. This 
occurred one and a half miles west of the Demilitarized Zone.
  As a result, Sergeant Dyer was declared missing in action and his 
body has not been recovered. He has been awarded a Purple Heart, the 
Bronze Star with V device, and other commendations.
  Schreiner University in Kerrville will be honoring Sergeant Dyer in 
September, and I am honored to recognize Sergeant Dyer for his heroism 
and honorable service to our country. May all those who serve our 
Nation know how grateful we are for their dedication to securing the 
blessings of liberty.
  May God bless Sergeant Dyer and his loved ones, and may God bless 
America.
I rise today to recognize the 10th Annual 
Taste of Ethiopia and its organizers. The Taste of Ethiopia is an 
annual event that highlights the culture and community service of many 
in Colorados Ethiopian immigrant community.
  Colorado families of all backgrounds attend this event to experience 
Ethiopian culture, music, food, art, crafts, games, and dance. 
Organizers and volunteers share these vibrant facets of their lives 
with the community, and attendees embrace and learn about the many ways 
the Ethiopian diaspora community enriches our district.
  My district has one of the largest Ethiopian populations in the State 
of Colorado, a characteristic that I consider among our strengths. I 
have had the privilege of attending the Taste of Ethiopia several times 
over the last ten years, and I know firsthand how meaningful this event 
is to our community. It is an honor to be included in this celebration.
  I recognize the leadership of the Taste of Ethiopias organizers, the 
contributions of Ethiopian individuals, families, and organizations, 
and the support of volunteers and our community who make this one of 
the districts popular annual events.
RECOGNIZING THE OUTSTANDING SERVICE OF MR. FARRIS ``CARLOS HILL ON 
                           of south carolina
I rise today to celebrate the remarkable 
career and dedicated service of Mr. Farris ``Carlos Hill, a pillar of 
our Ninety Six, South Carolina community, as he retires from the 
Department of the Air Force.
  Carlos journey is a testament to dedication, perseverance, and 
commendable service to our Nation both in uniform and as a civilian 
leader. Born in 1964 to a working-class family in Greenwood, South 
Carolina, he learned the values of hard work and determination from a 
young age. Notably, he attended the first integrated first grade class 
in our state, an experience that undoubtedly shaped his character and 
resilience.
  Following his graduation from Ninety Six High School in 1982, Carlos, 
fueled by his work ethic, secured an Air Force ROTC scholarship to 
Clemson University. This marked the start of his lifelong dedication to 
our Nation. Earning a degree in Civil Engineering in 1986, he embarked 
on a distinguished military career. His assignments spanned Chanute 
AFB, Mather AFB, and Dyess AFB, where he excelled as an aircraft 
maintenance officer. He further served as an Assistant Professor of 
Aerospace Studies at Rutgers and Princeton Universities, inspiring 
future Air Force leaders.
  Transitioning to the Air Force Reserve after nine years of active 
duty service, Carlos balanced his military responsibilities with a 
successful civilian career at General Electric. His unwavering 
commitment extended to deployments in support of Operations Enduring 
Freedom and Iraqi Freedom. During his second mobilization, he sought 
opportunities to further his military career through the Air Force 
Legislative Fellowship Program. This prestigious program allowed Carlos 
to work closely with congressional members and staff, providing him 
with invaluable legislative experience and insights that would shape 
his future career in legislative affairs.
  In 2013, Carlos assumed the crucial role of Mobilization Assistant to 
the Director of Legislative Liaison at the Pentagon, while concurrently 
serving as the Director of Air Force Reserve Policy Integration in a 
civilian capacity. He became a vital bridge between the Air Force and 
Congress, securing vital resources and advocating for both the active 
force and Reserves. His promotion to Brigadier General in 2015 was a 
fitting culmination of his outstanding military career.
  Retiring from the Reserve in 2019, Carlos remained dedicated to his 
civilian role, shaping policies as Director of Air Force Reserve Policy 
Integration at the Pentagon. Here, he continued to serve with 
distinction, shaping policies that directly impacted the lives and 
careers of thousands of Air Force Reservists. Carlos civilian tenure 
was marked by his unwavering commitment to improving the operational 
readiness and quality of life for Airmen. He was instrumental in 
identifying and resolving issues affecting the Air Force Reserve, 
developing legislative strategies, and coordinating with Congress on 
significant policy matters. His efforts included formulating Air Force 
Reserve strategic goals, managing policy initiatives, and maintaining 
liaison with Congressional Defense Committee Chairs and a wide range of 
other members of Congress. He also ensured that Air Force senior 
leaders were fully prepared for Congressional testimonies and 
engagements, significantly contributing to the successful navigation of 
complex legislative landscapes.
  Beyond his military and government service, Carlos has remained 
deeply involved with Clemson University where he actively serves on the 
Alumni Association Board. His dedication to mentoring and supporting 
students, especially those in the ROTC program, has left a lasting 
impact. Carlos frequently returns to Clemson to speak with and mentor 
current students, including Air Force ROTC cadets. In recognition of 
his significant contributions, Carlos was honored with the Clemson 
University Distinguished Service Award in 2023, highlighting his 
exceptional service and commitment to the university and its community.
  As Carlos embarks on a well-deserved retirement, I extend my deepest 
gratitude for his unwavering commitment. His exemplary service has been 
a true inspiration for future generations.
I rise today to pay tribute to Memphis and 
national rock n roll legend Jimi Jamison as we approach the 10th 
anniversary of his death in 2014. Mr. Jamison is best known as the 
frontman of the band Survivor and for hits that placed him at the top 
of the music charts in collaboration with other artists. He co-wrote 
``Im Always Here, the theme song for the television series 
``Baywatch, and performed ``Burning Heart with Survivor for the 
film ``Rocky IV, but is best known in Memphis for his performances of 
``Eye of the Tiger at University of Memphis Tigers sporting events. 
Born in Durant, Mississippi, he moved as an infant to Memphis and 
considered our city his home. In 2022, a stretch of Highland Street 
between Central and Southern avenues was named Jimi Jamison Street. 
Acclaimed for his rich vocal skills, Jimi Jamison will be long 
remembered for his contributions to American music. I join his many 
fans and friends in remembering him as we near the September 1 tenth 
anniversary of his passing.
today I pay tribute to the legacy of the 
legendary Juan Jose ``Johnny Canales, who passed away on June 12, 
2024. Johnny was a cultural icon whose influence on the Latino 
community, particularly in South Texas, is uncontested. Beyond Johnnys 
beloved music and television host careers, he was a beacon of hope and 
inspiration for countless aspiring Hispanics and Latinos.
  Canales was born in Nuevo Leon, Mexico, and raised in Robstown, 
Texas. Hes best remembered today for his groundbreaking bilingual 
variety show, The `Johnny Canales Show. This show began in 1983 in 
Corpus Christi and provided an unprecedented stage for Tejano and 
Latino artists when such opportunities were scarce. It became a vital 
part of the cultural fabric of South Texas and beyond, showcasing 
emerging talents and giving them a chance to shine.
  Johnnys enthusiastic support of young artists helped launch numerous 
careers, fostering a sense of pride and accomplishment within the 
Latino community. His catchphrase, ``You got it! Take it away! 
symbolized encouragement and empowerment. His show was more than 
entertainment; it celebrated Latino culture and identity.
  Beyond his contributions to music, Johnny served in the Army and was 
an avid supporter of civil rights and veterans issues. During his 
three years of active-duty service, he formed the foundation of his 
advocacy for the troops and veterans, a dedication that made him a 
cherished community figure.
  Despite facing health challenges later in life, Johnny continued 
influencing and uplifting his community. Alongside his wife, Nora, he 
returned to television with ``El Show de Johnny y Nora Canales, 
ensuring that the voices of Latino artists remained heard and 
celebrated.
  Johnny is survived by his two daughters, Nora Seleste Canales and 
Miroslava Canales.
, let us honor and celebrate the life of Johnny Canales, a 
man who truly embodied the spirit of the Latino community and a pioneer 
who paved the way for future generations of artists.