I rise today to commemorate 
the twentieth anniversary of the Department of Transportations 
Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration (PHMSA).
  On June 10, 1999, a pipeline leak caused a massive explosion in my 
district in Bellingham, Washington. The rupture released more than a 
quarter million gallons of gasoline into Whatcom Creek. The gasoline 
ignited, sending a fireball racing down the creek that killed two 10-
year-old boys and an 18-year-old young man. The two boys, Stephen 
Tsiorvas and Wade King, were playing in a creek near their homes on an 
idyllic summer day, and the young man, Liam Wood, had just graduated 
from high school and was fly-fishing for trout.
  The American people, including my constituents in response to the 
tragic Bellingham incident, justifiably raised safety concerns that 
there was not enough federal oversight of pipelines and hazardous 
materials. In response, Congress created PHMSA within the Department of 
Transportation in 2004 to do just that, as part of the Norman Y. Mineta 
Research and Special Programs Improvement Act, which was signed into 
law on November 30, 2004.
  Twenty years after the 2004 creation of this new modal administration 
specifically focused on pipeline and hazardous materials transportation 
safety, PHMSA continues its work. This includes overseeing $1 billion 
in pipeline safety grants as part of the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law 
so communities can repair or replace aging, leak-prone natural gas 
pipeline infrastructure while creating jobs, reducing methane emissions 
and keeping communities safe.
  Last December, the Transportation &amp; Infrastructure Committee passed a 
bipartisan pipeline safety reauthorization bill to ensure PHMSA and 
state pipeline safety inspectors have the resources they need. This 
legislation increases transparency and accountability from pipeline 
operators and supports emerging technology in pipelines, including for 
carbon dioxide and hydrogen.
  I am grateful for PHMSAs two decades of work and the agencys 
ongoing commitment to protecting people and the environment by 
advancing the safe transportation of energy and other hazardous 
materials that are essential to daily life.
  In the 119th Congress, I look forward to a bipartisan effort to 
reauthorize the work of PHMSAs Office of Pipeline Safety, as we have 
for the past two decades. More work remains, including ensuring first 
responders have the training they need to address accidents and 
incidents where hazardous materials are released whether that is by 
pipeline, rail, or any other mode of transportation. Safety is a need 
in every community in every Congressional District and in my role in 
the Transportation and Infrastructure Committee, I will continue to 
work to reach common ground to enhance safety for all Americans. I 
thank PHMSA for its ongoing work to do the same.
I rise today to recognize Lieutenant Charles 
E. Richmond II of Rockwall, Texas, and award him a Congressional 
Veteran Commendation. Lieutenant Richmond honorably served in the 
United States Army for over twenty years, both in an Active Duty role 
and as a reservist.
  Lieutenant Richmond began his distinguished career in the United 
States Army, where he served with honor and distinction. During his 
time serving our country, he demonstrated exceptional leadership, 
strategic thinking, and a deep commitment to the values that define the 
Army--loyalty, duty, respect, selfless service, honor, integrity, and 
personal courage. Over the course of his military service, Lieutenant 
Richmond participated in numerous assignments, missions, and 
operations, always prioritizing the safety and well-being of his fellow 
soldiers and the nation he swore to defend. His ability to lead with 
integrity, his tactical acumen, and his ability to adapt to the 
challenges of military service earned him the admiration of peers and 
superiors alike.
  After his service in the Army, Lieutenant Richmond transitioned 
seamlessly into a new chapter of service as a police officer. For more 
than twenty years, he served in this demanding and high-pressure role 
with the same dedication to protecting and serving his community. As a 
law enforcement officer, Lieutenant Richmond stood as a pillar of 
strength, always striving to maintain order, promote safety, and foster 
positive relationships between law enforcement and the public. His 
presence on the force was marked by a steadfast commitment to justice, 
an unwavering respect for human dignity, and a tireless work ethic. 
Whether responding to critical incidents or mentoring younger officers, 
Lieutenant Richmond demonstrated the qualities of a leader and a 
servant, working tirelessly to ensure that the community remained safe 
and secure.

  Throughout his career, Lieutenant Richmond exemplified what it means 
to be a public servant. His courage, resilience, and professionalism 
set a standard for others to follow. The impact of his service will be 
felt for many years to come, as the countless lives he touched--whether 
as a soldier or as a police officer--will continue to carry the lessons 
he imparted through his actions and leadership.
  Lieutenant Richmond is also an exemplary father and husband. 
Throughout his career, he worked hard to ensure that his family was 
taken care of, and that they had all of the opportunities.
  I am honored to represent Lieutenant Richmond in Texas 4th 
Congressional District. It is a privilege to award him the 
Congressional Veteran Commendation for his service to our Nation and to 
the people of North Texas.
I rise today to recognize Major Jeffrey 
Wiley and award him a Congressional Veteran Commendation. In honor of 
Major Jay Wileys dedicated 20-year career in the United States Army, 
we extend our deepest gratitude for his exemplary service. Hailing from 
Rockwall, Texas, Major Wileys commitment to duty and country reflects 
an unwavering dedication to safeguarding our Nation and advancing 
military operations both at home and abroad.
  Throughout his distinguished career, Major Wiley served as a Signals 
Officer, Detachment Commander, and Operations Officer. His roles 
required significant expertise and responsibility, overseeing multi-
national and joint-service intelligence activities and ensuring 
seamless coordination across multiple defense sectors. His leadership 
was vital to the success of intelligence operations, bringing together 
personnel from various branches and nations, and enabling information 
sharing at critical moments in support of national security. His 
knowledge and strategic vision in air defense systems also enhanced our 
militarys operational effectiveness and strengthened our national 
defense posture.
  In 1991, Major Wiley deployed to Kuwait, where he contributed to the 
coalition efforts

during Operation Desert Storm, exemplifying courage and commitment in 
service to his country. His work as part of the coalition underscored 
his ability to work effectively in high-pressure, international 
environments, providing crucial signals intelligence and operations 
expertise in one of the most significant conflicts of our time.
  Major Jay Wileys legacy of service and leadership in the United 
States Army is a testament to his dedication, skill, and loyalty. His 
contributions have made a lasting impact on our Nations security and 
on the lives of those with whom he served. We honor his sacrifices and 
accomplishments and express our heartfelt thanks for his years of 
dedicated service to our country.
  I am honored to represent Major Wiley in Texas 4th Congressional 
District. It is a privilege to award him the Congressional Veteran 
Commendation for his service to our Nation and to the people of North 
Texas.
I rise today to recognize Staff Sergeant 
Mark Russell of Sherman, Texas, and award him a Congressional Veteran 
Commendation. Staff Sergeant Russell honorably served in the United 
States Air Force during the Vietnam war.
  Staff Sergeant Russell trained in Radiology, Radiation Technology, 
and medical physics. During his time serving in the U.S. Air Force, he 
was given the responsibility to open and establish a Radiation Oncology 
treatment center to qualify the Wright-Patterson AFB as a comprehensive 
cancer treatment center. Additionally, he received the National Defense 
Service Medal, the AFM 900-3, and a Sharp Shooter Badge for his service 
in the U.S. Air Force.
  Staff Sergeant Russell is a graduate of the Hobe Sound Bible College 
in Florida, where he received a bachelors degree in educational 
administration in 1970. He began working at the Wright-Patterson AFB 
Medical Centers Radiation Oncology facility that same year while 
completing postgraduate studies. Staff Sergeant Russell later received 
his Master of Science in Radiological Physics from Ohio State 
University and a Master of Health Administration from Washington 
University. Throughout his extensive career, he has published numerous 
studies on the topic of oncology and worked diligently to bring us one 
step closer to defeating cancer. From 2007 to 2012, Staff Sergeant 
Russell served as the Director for Physics and Technology Services at 
the Moffitt Cancer Center in Florida.
  I am honored to represent Staff Sergeant Russell in Texas 4th 
Congressional district. It is a pleasure to award him the Congressional 
Veteran Commendation for his service to our Nation and to the people of 
North Texas.
I rise to honor the 50th birthday of 
Captain Erik E. Anderson.
  Captain Anderson was born on December 1, 1974. Raised in Lafayette, 
Louisiana, Captain Anderson graduated from the Rensselaer Polytechnic 
Institute through the Naval Reserve Officers Training Corps in 1997 
with a Bachelor of Science Degree in Mechanical Engineering. He first 
served aboard USS Hopper (DDG 70) from 1998 to 1999, completing the 
ships maiden deployment, a dry-docking availability, and surface 
warfare officer qualification.
  After serving on the USS Hopper, he completed the Naval Nuclear 
Propulsion Programs nuclear pipeline training and reported to his 
second division officer tour on USS Theodore Roosevelt (CVN 71) from 
2001 to 2003. He completed the ships ``Iron Man Cruise in support of 
Operation Enduring Freedom and became a Nuclear Engineer Officer.
  Captain Anderson was selected for shore duty at Naval Reactors 
Headquarters in Washington, DC, where he worked from 2003 to 2006 on 
advanced technology Insertion projects for CVN 68 Class ships 
propulsion plant, preliminary designs for USS Gerald R Ford (CVN 78), 
and test programs for west coast CVNs and ex-Enterprise (CVN 65).
  During this time, he attended graduate school at The Catholic 
University of America, earning a Master of Engineering Degree in 
Engineering Management.
  From late 2006 to 2011, Captain Anderson served as the Assistant 
Program Manager for ex-Enterprise in the Naval Reactors Program Office 
for Surface Ships. During this time, he led the planning and execution 
of the ships last major dry-docking availability, allowing the ship to 
complete two more deployments prior to her removal service. He also led 
early planning and budgeting efforts for the one-of-a-kind defueling 
and inactivation of ex-Enterprise.
  Captain Anderson then transferred to the Nuclear Technology Division 
as the Director of Radiological Controls from 2011 to 2014. He was 
responsible for the radiation protection of all sailors, workers, the 
public, and the environment from the Naval Nuclear Propulsion Programs 
radioactivity on all ships, prototypes, shipyards, bases, DOE 
laboratories, and the Naval Reactors Facility. He also assisted with 
the Naval Reactors support of the U.S. Navys Operation Tomodachi in 
response to the nuclear accidents at Fukushima.
  From late 2014 to mid-2023, Captain Anderson assumed duties as the 
Program Manager for the Naval Reactors Facility in Idaho, where he led 
the Naval Reactors efforts to publish the draft and final 
Environmental Impact Statements for the recapitalization of spent fuel 
handling in Idaho, a three billion dollar major construction project. 
He has also led the Naval Reactors Facility fleet support mission in 
Idaho to process, examine, and package naval spent nuclear fuel in 
accordance with stringent Naval Nuclear Propulsion Program 
requirements, fleet schedules, and commitments to the State of Idaho.
  In July 2023, Captain Anderson transferred to the Acting Deputy 
Director for Governmental Affairs. In February 2024, he was selected as 
the Director for Governmental Affairs, where he oversees multiple 
aspects of the Naval Reactors Congressional Affairs efforts.
  Captain Andersons decorations include two Meritorious Service Medals 
and other individual and unit awards. His wife, Ania, and son, Aksel, 
consider him the head and the heart of their family.
  On December 1, 2024, Captain Anderson celebrated his 50th birthday. I 
thank Captain Anderson for his service and congratulate him for 
reaching this important milestone. I hope this next chapter is filled 
with as much adventure as the last.
I rise today to honor Palm 
Beach County Sheriffs Office (PBSO) Deputy Sheriff Jahmar Robinson, a 
diligent public servant, to congratulate him on being named the Field 
Operations Awardee at the 7th Annual Attorney General Awards for 
Distinguished Service in Policing. During his time with PBSO, Deputy 
Robinson has become a trusted presence and role model in the community.
  Deputy Robinsons knowledge of the County and its residents has 
prevented potential violent cnmes before they happen and has allowed 
him to respond effectively when incidents arise. He serves our local 
residents through community-oriented practices in policing, while 
combating crime and decreasing recidivism.
  Deputy Robinson serves as a positive role model for at-risk youth, 
and his work goes above and beyond crime prevention and response. From 
facilitating outreach to local schools to connecting local residents to 
childcare resources and domestic violence crisis resources, his 
dedication to enhancing safety and fostering civilian relationships has 
lasting impacts on building a safer and more connected community.
  Jahmars dedication to public safety and his service to the people of 
Palm Beach County is truly admirable. I am proud to celebrate him today 
and wish him continued success.
I rise today to honor the life and 
legacy of Mr. Jorge Cortez, who passed away on November 11, 2024, at 
the age of 81. Known for his signature red apron, white guayabera and 
white hat, Jorge was not just an icon of San Antonios culinary world 
but also a visionary artist and a champion of the citys vibrant 
cultura. A proud son of my hometown of San Antonio, Mr. Cortez leaves 
behind his seven children--Pete, Deborah, Christina, Paloma, Carino, 
Alexandra, and Sol Jorge, twelve grandchildren, and one great-
grandchild.
  In 1941, Mr. Cortezs parents, Pedro and Cruz, purchased a small 
three-table cafe that would become an iconic and beloved community 
institution. Mi Tierra Cafe was more than a place to dine--it became a 
haven for comunidad, filled with musica, murals, and the aromas of 
their authentic comida. After their father passed away in 1984, Mr. 
Cortez and his siblings committed themselves to preserving and 
expanding his legacy, creating a thriving business rooted in honoring 
and promoting their Latino culture. Under their leadership, La Familia 
Cortez grew to include five beloved restaurants, employing more than 
600 San Antonians. Mr. Cortezs creative spark was also behind the 
invention of sizzling fajitas, a dish that has become synonymous with 
Tex-Mex cuisine.
a restaurateur; he was an artist and a 
visionary leader who believed in using art and culture to uplift the 
community. His artistry extended beyond the murals of Mi Tierra to 
shape the cultural fabric of downtown San Antonio. Mr. Cortez played a 
key role in the establishment of Zona Cultural, a 44-block historic 
district designated by the City of San Antonio and the State of Texas 
that celebrates the diversity, creativity, and commerce of San Antonio. 
His vision for Zona Cultural transformed it into a hub of heritage and 
innovation, ensuring that future generations could experience and 
cherish the richness of the citys history.
  La Familia Cortez is the definition of the American dream, and the 
Cortez family continues to shape San Antonio for the better. Mr. Cortez 
was a lively and much-admired member of our community, and he will be 
greatly missed.
on December 3, 2024, I was not recorded on 
Roll Call No. 479. Had I been present, I would have voted YEA on Roll 
Call No. 479.
I would like to extend my congratulations to 
Judge Jim James for his service on the Stark County Court of Common 
Pleas, and my sincere gratitude for all that he has done for the people 
of Ohios 13th Congressional District, the ``Birthplace of Champions. 
I have appreciated his partnership as we worked together to expand 
opportunity and deliver results for our shared constituents.
  His drive to lead is commendable, and I have no doubt that he has 
bettered countless lives as a result of his steadfast service. 
Throughout his time in office, he proved to be a true public servant 
and leader. He led by example through his perseverance, compassion, and 
dedication to his role in the community.
  As he goes on to continue serving our community in new ways, I wish 
him all the best in his future endeavors. On behalf of Ohios 13th 
Congressional District, I thank him for his commitment to the people of 
Stark County and Northeast Ohio.
I would like to extend my congratulations to 
Judge Patricia Delaney for her service on the 5th District Court of 
Appeals, and my sincere gratitude for all that she has done for the 
people of Ohios 13th Congressional District, the ``Birthplace of 
Champions. I have appreciated her partnership as we worked together 
to expand opportunity and deliver results for our shared constituents.
  Her drive to lead is commendable, and I have no doubt that she has 
bettered countless lives as a result of her steadfast service. 
Throughout her time in office, she proved to be a true public servant 
and leader. She led by example through her perseverance, compassion, 
and dedication to her role in the community.
  As she goes on to continue serving our community in new ways, I wish 
her all the best in her future endeavors. On behalf of Ohios 13th 
Congressional District, I thank her for her commitment to the people of 
Northeast Ohio.
FOR HER EXCELLENT WORK ON BEHALF OF MINNESOTAS THIRD CONGRESSIONAL 
                              of minnesota
I rise today to recognize my former Staff 
Assistant and Legislative Correspondent, Zehra Khan, for her

work on behalf of every constituent in Minnesotas Third Congressional 
District. In August, Zehra departed my office for a new opportunity to 
attend Columbia University Graduate School of Arts and Science for 
Political Science, and I could not be more proud or grateful for her 
service.
  As a Minnesota District Three native, Zehra grew up in the district 
she so proudly served. After graduating from The Blake School, she 
attended and graduated from the University of Minnesota earning her 
Bachelor of Arts degree in political science. Her public service spans 
time working in State Legislative Offices and at the federal level. 
Zehra has strong ties to her cultural identity and community. She has a 
passion for global womens issues, even serving as a delegate to the 
68th UN Commission on The Status of Women.
  Zehras colleagues have had the honor of watching her evolve from a 
shy intern to a confident, capable Staff Assistant during her time in 
the office. Equally adept with pop culture critiques and international 
affairs analysis, Zehra has made our office both smarter and more 
relevant. Her deep roots in MN-03 allow her to both connect with 
constituents and offer the best local restaurant recommendations.
  The people of Minnesotas Third Congressional District were lucky to 
have her dedication and leadership, and she is dearly missed. However, 
we look forward to watching her succeed in graduate school and beyond.
I would like to extend my congratulations to 
Commissioner Janet Weir Creighton for her service as a Stark County 
Commissioner, and my sincere gratitude for all that she has done for 
the people of Ohios 13th Congressional District, the ``Birthplace of 
Champions. I have appreciated her partnership as we worked together 
to expand opportunity and deliver results for our shared constituents.
  Her drive to lead is commendable, and I have no doubt that she has 
bettered countless lives as a result of her steadfast service. 
Throughout her 40 years in public service, she has proven to be a true 
advocate and leader. She led by example through her perseverance, 
compassion, and dedication in her role in the community and those she 
served.
  As a woman in a position of influence, and sometimes the first woman 
in her various roles throughout her career, she has undoubtedly 
inspired the coming generation of young women to stand strong for what 
they believe in and strive for positions of leadership.
  For her outstanding devotion, she has earned the respect and esteem 
of many, and in the wake of her departure, I know her numerous 
contributions will not be forgotten I am confident that her fine 
character and decisive leadership will be sorely missed.
  As she goes on to continue serving our community in new ways, I wish 
her all the best in her future endeavors. Again, on behalf of Ohios 
13th Congressional District, I would like to thank Commissioner Janet 
Weir Creighton for her commitment to the people of Stark County and to 
Northeast Ohio.
Title IV of Senate Resolution 4, agreed to by the Senate of February 
4, 1977, calls for establishment of a system for a computerized 
schedule of all meetings and hearings of Senate committees, 
subcommittees, joint committees, and committees of conference. This 
title requires all such committees to notify the Office of the Senate 
Daily Digest--designated by the Rules Committee--of the time, place and 
purpose of the meetings, when scheduled and any cancellations or 
changes in the meetings as they occur.
  As an additional procedure along with the computerization of this 
information, the Office of the Senate Daily Digest will prepare this 
information for printing in the Extensions of Remarks section of the 
Congressional Record on Monday and Wednesday of each week.
  Meetings scheduled for Thursday, December 5, 2024 may be found in the 
Daily Digest of todays Record.

     10 a.m.
       Committee on the Judiciary
         To hold hearings to examine mass deportations.
                                                            SD-G50
     2 p.m.
       Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
       Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations
         To hold an oversight hearing to examine the Coast Guard.
                                                            SD-342

     10 a.m.
       Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs
         To hold hearings to examine consumer protection, focusing 
           on protecting workers money and fighting for the 
           dignity of work.
                                                            SD-538
     2:30 p.m.
       Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation
       Subcommittee on Communications, Media, and Broadband
         To hold hearings to examine communications networks 
           safety and security.
                                                            SR-253