I rise today to recognize the Helmville Labor 
Day Rodeo for their 60th year old operation, The Helmville Rodeo is 
commonly called ``the biggest little rodeo in Montana, drawing folks 
from all over the state to a town of less than 50 people to enjoy the 
events and festivities.
  Helmville has been around since Irish immigrants first made their way 
to the Big Sky, chasing fortune in the Gold Rush. Some of the first 
families to settle in Helmville back in the 1860s still live and work 
there. The ranches in the valley are passed down from generation to 
generation.
  Helmville is a classic Montana town, with one long road going through 
the middle, an old western bar on the side named the ``Copper Queen, 
and a school where several grades are taught at the same time. The kind 
of the place where you dont just know your neighbors by name but the 
whole town. It is nestled deep in a beautiful valley in the Garnet 
Mountain Range, the kind of gem that is scattered all around Montana.
  Once a year, Helmville is flooded with rodeo enjoyers from around the 
State. The Helmville Labor Day Rodeo is a major event in the area and 
has delivered on the promise of summer fun for 60 years now. Two days 
of bull riding, team roping, steer wrestling, mutton bustin and many 
other events are more than enough of a draw for Montanans to drive the 
hours that it takes to get from one small town to another. It is the 
last rodeo of the season for the Northern Rodeo Association, so top 
riders all show up to impress the crowds and try to score points to 
make it to the post season. The burgers or barbeque could draw any 
redblooded American to the scenic valley, but the one-of-a-kind events 
keep them there for the long haul. Whether it is trying to find the cow 
in a herd of steers at the wild cow milking event or the community 
dance, there is no shortage of western fun to remind us of what rural 
life is all about.
  Dont mistake the size of the town for the heart that is put into the 
event. Folks in Helmville are proud of the show they put on and anyone 
who has attended would attest to that. The rodeo club works year-round 
organizing the event, but as the date grows closer, the whole community 
comes together to pitch in and be ready on Labor Day weekend. 60 years 
is a lifetime of bringing joy, good sport, and great community to 
Western Montana. As it has grown from a ranch-led rodeo to a 
professional event, it has never lost its character.
, and my esteemed colleagues, I ask that you join me in 
congratulating the Helmville Rodeo on their 60th year of hosting a 
legendary Labor Day Rodeo. Bravo Zulu.
today I rise to pay tribute to 
Cecilia Pope, a constituent of mine who turns 100 years old on August 
26, 2024.
  Her journey began in 1924 as Cecilia Lujan Baca, in Clayton, New 
Mexico, where she spent her early years. She ventured to Denver, 
Colorado for high school, carving out a path of independence and 
growth. In October of 1947, fate introduced Cecilia to her first 
husband, Master Sargent Alfred Hill of the U.S. Air Force. They had two 
children together, John in 1950 and Lisa in 1955. However, tragedy 
struck as they embarked on their move to Biloxi, Mississippi, in July 
1957. Alfred, at the young age of 34, left this world due to a fatal 
heart attack, leaving Cecilia and their two children.
  Undeterred by the hardships, Cecilia moved to Amarillo, Texas, with 
her children. In 1960, she married Alex Pope, and welcomed a daughter, 
Alexis in 1963. As life unfolded, they traversed through various cities 
due to Alexs profession, ultimately settling in Houston in 1966, where 
they rooted themselves in the Sharpstown area.
  Tragedy struck once more when Alex passed away in 1987, yet Cecilias 
spirit remained unbroken. In 2004, she made the decision to move to 
Katy, Texas, to be near her two daughters.
  Her resilience and enthusiasm for life is inspiring. Despite the 
challenges she has faced, Cecilia remains active, independent, and 
devotes her time to her passions. Shes an avid reader, immerses 
herself in the world of literature, and finds solace in her prayer and 
family.
  Cecilia treasures the moments spent with her friends, children, eight 
grandchildren, and eight great-grandchildren. Her dedication to family 
and her unwavering spirit is a testament to her strength. Moreover, her 
faith has been an anchor throughout her life, and is an active member 
of the Epiphany of the Lord Catholic Church in Katy, Texas.
  Cecilias story is not just one of resilience in the face of 
adversity, but also a celebration of a life richly lived--a life that 
continues to inspire those around her. To that end, I want to once 
again honor her on behalf of the people in the 22nd Congressional 
District of Texas. I wish Cecilia a happy birthday.
  May God continue to bless her and her family every single day.
I rise today to recognize and congratulate 
. Mrs. Whitaker started Whitaker 
Farms with her late husband Richard in 1975, who she has surely honored 
with this award. Together, they purchased 36 acres of land in Randolph 
County and as a result of their hard work, Whitaker Farms has now grown 
to 1,000 acres and includes a variety of different crops. The Whitakers 
use innovative and sustainable farming practices to ensure high crop 
yields, healthy soil, drip irrigation and devote a majority of the land 
to organic production.
  Our state has a long and proud tradition of agricultural excellence. 
Many people dont even realize where the food they eat every day comes 
from, but the Whitakers could tell you they worked around the clock, 24 
hours a day when they first started, to ensure they could pay back 
their first bank loan while overcoming weather conditions that make 
farming nearly impossible. I know I speak for our region and entire 
state when I say thank you to our hard-working farmers and the 
Whitakers for their dedication to putting food on the table in North 
Carolina. From peanuts to sweet potatoes, North Carolina farmers 
generate some of the highest quality produce in the world. We are 
thrilled to recognize Mrs. Whitaker for her continuation of that 
tradition.
  Again, congratulations to Mrs. Whitaker for winning this prestigious 
award.
, please join me today in congratulating Mrs. Faylene 
Whitaker on being named North Carolina Farmer of the Year.
I rise to congratulate Culpeper Baptist 
Church on their 250th anniversary.
  Over the last 250 years, Culpeper Baptist Church has served as a 
space for the community to gather, connect, and worship. Formed in 1774 
as Mount Poney Baptist Church, the church was a place of worship open 
to all--Black, white, freemen, enslaved people, and servants. The 
community flourished under the ideals of religious liberty, which are 
forever woven into the history of Culpeper Baptist Church and the 
fabric of our nation thanks to the actions of its third pastor, John 
Leland. Leland directly petitioned then-Virginia legislator James 
Madison to enshrine religious liberty in our Constitution.
  In 1833, Mount Poney Baptist moved to the Town of Culpeper, where it 
built a new church in 1858. The church then changed its name to 
Culpeper Baptist Church in 1873. Finally, in 1955, Culpeper Baptist 
Church moved and began services in its present-day location.
  Since its inception, Culpeper Baptist Church has worked to serve the 
community well. In 1949, it established a kindergarten program--now 
known as the Child Development Center--which has grown to serve the 
community. Thanks to the labor of love poured into the program, it will 
celebrate 75 years of helping children from infancy through elementary 
school later this year. To better assist the community, Pastor J.T. 
Edwards created the Virginia Baptist Home for the Aged in 1950, known 
today as The Culpeper. Later, in partnership with the community, 
Culpeper Baptist Church renovated space within the churchs building to 
open Generations Central Adult Day Care in May 2022, where aging adults 
are provided with intergenerational programming and care. Finally, in 
response to the growing Latino population in Culpeper, Primera Iglesia 
Bautista Maranatha, the longest-serving Hispanic Church in Culpeper, 
was founded in 2001 at Culpeper Baptist. The church continues to thrive 
today.
  Throughout the last 250 years, Culpeper Baptist Church has cultivated 
a culture of faith and service. Mr. Speaker, I ask my colleagues to 
join me in congratulating Culpeper Baptist Church on their 250th 
anniversary. Please join me in wishing this community success as they 
work to foster a love for their neighbors and honor a history that 
upholds the American ideal of religious liberty.
it is with great respect and admiration that 
I recognize and congratulate my constituent, Joyce Hunter, on her 
retirement from one of the largest multiemployer pension funds in the 
United States, the Central Pension Fund of the International Union of 
Operating Engineers and Participating Employers (``Central Pension 
Fund).
  Joyces lifelong dedication to the Central Pension Fund, which has 
spanned over four decades, and its mission to provide secure retirement 
benefits to operating engineers and

their families, has been unwavering. During her tenure, Joyce has 
successfully worked in various capacities in nearly every department of 
the Fund and has a well-earned reputation both inside and outside of 
the organization for her institutional knowledge and her unwavering 
work ethic. Indeed, most developments at the Central Pension Fund--both 
big and small--have likely involved Joyces input and advice.
  As Director of Human Resources and Administration, Joyce has 
effectively served as the face of the organization for the Funds 
employees, having spearheaded the Funds recruitment and hiring 
efforts, while also playing an integral role in strategic planning. In 
addition, by all accounts, Joyce has always gone above and beyond her 
technical job duties and has prioritized the professional development 
and personal well-being of her colleagues by creating and fostering a 
positive and enjoyable work culture. In that regard, Joyce is notorious 
for hosting and facilitating costume-themed events and ice cream 
socials, and for placing personal notes and small gifts on her 
colleagues desks in the pre-dawn hours before work.
  In summary, Joyces well-deserved retirement marks the end of an 
illustrious career, and while the Central Pension Fund will undoubtedly 
miss her deep institutional knowledge, dedication, and guidance, I am 
confident that the Fund will continue to thrive for decades to come as 
a result of her efforts.
, I ask that you and my other distinguished colleagues 
join me in recognizing the lifetime of selfless service and tireless 
dedication of Joyce Hunter. Her commitment to the Central Pension Fund 
serves as an inspiration to us all, and we extend our best wishes upon 
her retirement in the years to come.
I rise today in honor of Joe Castiglione as 
he receives the Ford C. Frick Award for broadcasting excellence.
  Born on March 2, 1947, to parents Pamela and Frank, Castiglione was 
raised in Hamden, Connecticut, alongside his seven siblings. With a 
passion for sports broadcasting from a young age, Castiglione grew up 
listening to longtime Yankees announcer and inaugural Ford C. Frick 
Award recipient, Mel Allen. Castiglione followed his passion for 
broadcasting at Colgate University, where he received his Bachelor of 
Arts and worked for the schools radio station broadcasting Colgate 
football and basketball games.
  After receiving his masters degree from Syracuse University, 
Castiglione began his career as a television sports anchor at WFMJ-TV 
in Youngstown, Ohio. It was in Youngstown where Castiglione also met 
the love of his life, Janice Lowry, a third-grade teacher. 364 days 
after their first date, Joe and Janice were married and will celebrate 
their 53rd anniversary this November. Over their past five decades of 
marriage, Castiglione and Janice have raised their three children, 
Duke, Tom, and Kate, and now have six grandchildren.
  In 1979, Castiglione continued his broadcasting career and first 
began reporting on baseball at WKYC-TV, calling games for the Cleveland 
Indians. He later called games for the Milwaukee Brewers in 1981, 
before returning to Cleveland in 1982. In 1983 he was hired on a one-
year agreement with the Red Sox. 42 seasons later, Castiglione is now 
the longest tenured announcer in Red Sox history.
  Throughout his career, Castiglione has called over 6,000 games, 
including four no-hitters and two 20-strikeout games. Additionally, 
Castiglione was the first Red Sox broadcaster to call the final out of 
a Red Sox World Championship, ending the teams 86-year drought in 
2004. He would later deliver the final out call for the Red Soxs World 
Series wins in 2007, 2013, and 2018. Outside of his work as a Red Sox 
radio announcer, Castiglione taught broadcast journalism at 
Northeastern University for 29 years and Franklin Pierce University for 
12 years and has been a long-time supporter of the Jimmy Fund.
  Over the last four decades, Castiglione has established himself as a 
pillar of the baseball community. In 2014, Castiglione was inducted 
into the Red Sox Hall of Fame, and on July 20, 2024, Castiglione was 
awarded the National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museums Ford C. Frick 
Award. This award deservedly celebrates Castigliones passion for 
baseball and commitment to quality broadcasting throughout his career.
, I am proud to honor Joe Castiglione and ask that my 
colleagues join me in recognizing his years of hard work and impact on 
sports broadcasting.
I rise today to honor the life 
and legacy of Mark Myers, who served as the Vice President of the 
National Association of Letter Carriers (NALC) Branch 79 Seattle.
  Mark served as NALCs legislative liaison to my office for many 
years. He was a constant advocate for the voices and needs of his 
unions members. He was a very effective advocate and all that were 
]ucky enough to know Mark know that he was both sincere and kind in all 
that he did.
  Throughout his life, Mark embodied what it truly means to serve. Mark 
served his union through his work with my office, but a]so through his 
work at the Martin Luther King, Jr. County Labor Council and the 
Washington State Labor Council. Not only was Mark the current Vice 
President of the NALC Branch 79 Seattle, but he had also served as 
Secretary-Treasurer and made history as the only retiree re-elected for 
three consecutive terms.
  Mark spent his time outside of work continuing to serve his 
community. He was a former member of the Highline Community Council and 
a devout member of his local church, the Saint Francis of Assisi Parish 
in Burien.
  Mark is a shining example of true leadership and commitment. I 
appreciate his many years of service working with my office, as well as 
all of his service to our community. He will be deeply missed.
I rise today to recognize the life of Mr. 
Aldo Javier Garcia, who tragically passed away on June 24, 2024, at the 
age of 25. Mr. Garcia was born in Hanford, California to Javier Pelagio 
Garcia and Araceli Navarro Garcia. He had one brother, Orlando Navarro 
Garcia. Mr. Garcia grew up in the Central Valley and was the proud son 
of farmworkers, from whom he learned the values of hard work and 
perseverance from a young age. After graduating from Corcoran High 
School, Mr. Garcia went on to attend the University of California, 
Berkeley. Mr. Garcia was an exceptional student and dedicated his time 
to the university community, having served as the Student Director of 
the UC Berkeley Public Service Center. In 2021, Mr. Garcia received his 
Bachelor of Arts Degree in Political Science and was accepted to the 
prestigious Jess M. Unruh Assembly Fellowship. After being selected by 
the fellowship program, Mr. Garcia served as a Fellow for California 
State Assemblymember Lori Wilson. Last year, Mr. Garcia began his dream 
job as a legislative staffer for Assemblymember Juan Carrillo. As 
Assemblymember Carillos Legislative Aide, he worked hard on 
legislation to help improve the lives of Californians. Mr. Garcia was a 
valuable asset and a strong leader on both Assemblymember Wilsons and 
Carrillos teams, and he was at the beginning of an impactful career in 
California politics. Mr. Garcia will be remembered by his family, 
friends, and colleagues as a kind and compassionate young man who 
always put the needs of others before his own. His passion for 
politics, dedication to his community, and service to the State of 
California will never be forgotten. Mr. Speaker, I ask all my 
colleagues in the House of Representatives to join me in honoring the 
incredible life of Mr. Aldo Javier Garcia. My thoughts and prayers are 
with his family during this difficult time.