I rise today to recognize Brenda and 
David Hughes, creators of the ``Stay in the Light Christmas light 
exhibit. Their award-winning ``Stay in the Light spectacle was 
started in memory of their son, Nathaniel, who struggled with 
depression. Nathaniel passed away in April of 2019, and the festivities 
that the Hughes host are in honor of his memory. The Hughes family 
accepts donations of blankets and socks that are donated to Meals on 
Wheels Senior Services of Rockwall County for the elderly.
  Food items and toys are also accepted for donation. Brenda and David 
commit over 100 hours and hang 60,000 lights to honor Nathaniel and 
give back to those in need within their community. I thank Brenda and 
David Hughes for bringing extra light to our North Texas community.
I rise today to recognize our Texas-24 
Hometown Hero, Akshat Athale, who is not only a student at Coppell High 
School, but also the founder of Saksham, a non-profit organization that 
works to improve financial literacy among underserved youth 
communities. Saksham has worked with underserved and neurodivergent 
communities. on both the local and global scale, to Provide them with 
workshops on a variety of financial literacy topics.
  These workshops provide life-changing skills to communities in need 
and will have a lasting benefit. I was glad to have Akshat as a member 
of my Congressional Youth Advisory Council and I congratulate him on 
recently receiving the Congressional Award. Our North Texas community 
is made better by people like Akshat, who are dedicated to making a 
positive impact.
I rise today to recognize Eddy 
Ketchersid, who retired earlier this year as a Senior Minister at the 
Branch Church in Farmers Branch. Eddy has been a positive impact on the 
city of Farmers Branch and the North Texas community at large for 60+ 
years.
  Eddy is an alumnus of Abilene Christian University and a true Texan 
at heart. He has served his community in various respects throughout 
his life. Eddy has served the city of Farmers Branch as a Community 
Minister, advocate and member of the Chamber of Commerce, Rotary 
International, and head of the Metrocrest Mayors Prayer Breakfast. He 
has led many bible studies and prayer groups for the ministry for over 
half a century.
  I thank Eddy for going above and beyond for our community. His 
selflessness and dedication do not go unnoticed.
I rise today to recognize our Texas-24 
Hometown Hero, Grapevine Police Officer Patrick ONeal. In 2017, 
Officer ONeal stalled working on a project to help law enforcement 
find any area or room on a school campus in an emergency, within 
seconds. After realizing this could be lifesaving for officers who are 
responding to an emergency at a school campus they may not be familiar 
with, Officer ONeal embarked on his mission of numbering every door 
and hallway in Grapevine ISD, then creating digital maps of the floor 
plans to share across departments.
  It took years to gather the information for all the schools in the 
district. The maps include detailed information about all doors, their 
accessibility to police, the most efficient points of entry and 
directions to specific classrooms, and even indicate which doors 
require keys to open. As a result of Officer ONeals work, Grapevine 
Police now have detailed maps of each campus in Grapevine ISD which the 
police department can access via a digital system on their phone.
  Earlier this year, Officer ONeal was honored with the 2023 State of 
Texas Law Enforcement Achievement Award for Public Services at the 
State Capitol. Id like to thank Officer ONeal for his tireless 
efforts and profound dedication to keeping North Texas students and 
staff safe.
I rise today to recognize our Texas-24 
Hometown Hero Krissy Sarine-Van Brunt, who founded the non-profit 
organization Just Because, which is dedicated to giving back to under-
resourced communities in North Texas. Krissy founded Just Because after 
she and her daughter observed the hardship of homelessness in the 
scorching Texas heat. She compiled a list of several necessities that 
the homeless desire and went to Facebook to seek help. Through that 
act, Just Because was started after she received overwhelming support 
online.
  Krissy has also partnered with Bombas to donate over 8,000 pairs of 
socks to the homeless in our community. In addition to providing 
Blessing Bags to the homeless, Krissy also volunteers at nursing homes 
and animal shelters in her spare time. Id like to thank Krissy for 
going above and beyond for our community. Her selflessness and 
dedication do not go unnoticed.
I rise today to recognize our Texas-24 
Hometown Heroes, Addison Police Department Officers Daniel Gutierrez, 
and Mark Meraz. On June 15, 2023, Addison Police Department Officers 
Daniel Gutierrez and Mark Meraz responded to a call regarding an 
injured person. When they arrived on scene, they found a man bleeding 
excessively from his arm after getting cut with glass. Officers 
Gutierrez and Meraz quickly placed a tourniquet on his arm while they 
waited for paramedics to arrive. The wounds were severe, and the man 
lost an extensive amount of blood due to his injuries. The tourniquet 
application by Officers Gutierrez and Meraz saved his life while 
waiting for paramedics to arrive on scene.
  The Addison Police Department recently honored them both with the 
Preservation of Life Award. I thank Officer Gutierrez and Officer Meraz 
for going above and beyond to protect and serve North Texans.
as family, friends, and community members 
gather to celebrate the life of Nazar L. Nazarian, I would like to join 
in paying tribute to his memory. Mr. Nazarian passed away on August 28, 
2023, after a life filled with numerous professional and personal 
accomplishments.
a prominent member of the Armenian community, a 
successful businessman, and a fixture of the Armenian General 
Benevolent Union (AGBU). From the Levon and Satenig Nazarian Primary 
School in Lebanon to the Levon and Claudia Nazarian Radiology Center, 
to name just a few, Mr. Nazarians philanthropic endeavors support 
Armenians across the globe. Likewise, his vision to connect and promote 
the Armenian community led to the construction of the Embassy of the 
Republic of Armenia in Lebanon and the AGBU Armenia building in 
Yerevan. He also focused his philanthropic endeavors to serve the 
Church, supporting the construction of St. Vartan Armenian Cathedral in 
New York and the St. Dertad chapel at St. Gregory the Illuminator 
Cathedral in Yerevan, among others.
  His commitment to faith, culture and the arts, as well as social and 
humanitarian causes have left an indelible mark on the community. Mr. 
Nazarian lived his life in service to his community and his passion to 
help others is evident.
  Born in Aleppo, Syria and raised in Lebanon, Mr. Nazarian immigrated 
to the United States in the 1950s. Together with his late wife Artemis 
Topjian, Mr. Nazarian instilled in their children the importance of 
hard work and community service. Mr. Nazarian leaves behind a loving 
family, including his daughter Seta, son Levon and his wife Claudia, 5 
grandchildren, and 2 great-grandchildren, who will no doubt continue 
the Nazarian legacy of charity and compassion.
, I sincerely hope that my colleagues will join me in 
honoring Nazar L. Nazarian for his devotion to family, faith, and 
community. His generous spirit and impact on the Armenian community 
both here and abroad will continue to be felt for generations to come.
today, I introduce the Protecting 
Independent Contractors from Discrimination Act, which would extend to 
independent contractors the same federal antidiscrimination protections 
provided to employees. This bill would extend the following 
antidiscrimination statutes, which apply to employees, to independent 
contractors: Title VII of

the Civil Rights Act of 1964, the Age Discrimination in Employment Act 
of 1967, Title I of the Americans with Disabilities Act, Section 505 of 
the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 and Title II of the Genetic Information 
Nondiscrimination Act of 2008.
  According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, approximately 7 percent 
of workers are considered independent contractors. Independent 
contractors, who often do the same work as employees, have almost none 
of the workplace protections provided to employees, including health 
insurance, collective bargaining, retirement security and even 
antidiscrimination. This bill focuses only on discrimination, from 
which every worker is entitled to be free.
RECOGNIZING BRIGADIER GENERAL WILLIAM ``BILL R. DAVIS, NEW HAMPSHIRE 
                            of new hampshire
I rise today to congratulate William 
``Bill R. Davis on his promotion to Brigadier General of the New 
Hampshire Air National Guard. With nearly 3 decades of dedicated 
service, William has demonstrated an unwavering commitment to keeping 
our country safe and secure.
  His current work as the Chief of Staff--Air at the Joint Force 
Headquarters in New Hampshire speaks to his exceptional leadership 
skills. He has displayed substantial strategic planning abilities as he 
implements crucial policies in this role. He is also an advisor to New 
Hampshires Joint Legislative Liaison team, consistently going above 
and beyond to ensure the effectiveness of our national security 
efforts.
  Bill attended Boston University where he earned a degree in Business 
Administration in 1989. From there he attended basic training as well 
as U.S. Army Airborne School and RIARNG Officer Candidate School. In 
December 1996, he received his commission from the Rhode Island Army 
National Guard and joined the New Hampshire Air National Guard in 1998. 
He has since been a longstanding resident of New Hampshire, giving back 
to his community and residents of the Granite State. His dedication to 
public service and New Hampshire is evident through his previous roles, 
including Director of Staff--Air at the Joint Force Headquarters in New 
Hampshire.
  In addition to his extensive service, Bill possesses a wealth of 
knowledge and experience, having successfully completed rigorous 
training programs such as Squadron Officer School, Air Command and 
Staff College, and Air War College. His exemplary service has been 
recognized through his award of the Legion of Merit, Meritorious 
Service Medal with 4 oak leaf clusters, Joint Service Achievement 
Medal, and the Air Force Achievement Medal.
  Bills remarkable career also includes leadership roles as the Vice 
Commander of the 157th Air Refueling Wing, squadron command, deputy 
group command, and tours at the National Guard Bureau and U.S. Embassy 
in El Salvador. He has also served in leadership for the Director of 
Staff Advisory Council and the Regional Economic Development Center. 
While we can never fully repay the debt of gratitude we owe him for his 
honorable contributions, we recognize his decades of dedicated service 
and the profound impact he has had on our Nation.
  On behalf of the constituents of New Hampshires First Congressional 
District, I congratulate Bill on his promotion to Brigadier General and 
commend him for his tireless service to our Nation and the great state 
of New Hampshire. This promotion marks a significant milestone, and I 
eagerly anticipate the next chapter in his distinguished career.
it is with great enthusiasm that 
I rise to recognize the remarkable work of the Urban League of Broward 
County.
  The National Urban League is a historic civil rights organization 
dedicated to elevating the

standard of living in historically underserved urban communities. 
Founded in 1975 as an affiliate of the National Urban League, the Urban 
League of Broward County is a community-based organization dedicated to 
empowering communities and changing lives.
  The League helps our underserved communities achieve their highest 
true social parity, economic self-reliance, power, and civil rights. 
The organization promotes economic empowerment through education and 
job training, housing and community development, workforce development, 
entrepreneurship, health, and quality of life.
  The League helps our community achieve these goals through a variety 
of programming--from their Summer Enrichment Program, which offers 
students the opportunity to create, discover, and learn, to ADVANCE-U, 
which offers a full range of essential economic resources for residents 
to help them succeed in the workforce, stabilize their finances and 
build assets.
  The Urban League of Broward Countys commitment to the health and 
wellness of Browards families is extensive, impressive, and inspiring. 
I am grateful to the leadership and staff for their tireless efforts to 
fight for the rights of my constituents and all Americans to live with 
freedom, dignity, and prosperity.
  I thank President and CEO, Dr. Germaine Smith-Baugh, and everyone at 
the Urban League of Broward County for improving the lives of those in 
Floridas 25th Congressional District.