I rise today to commemorate the 
ten-year anniversary of Obergefell v. Hodges, a landmark U.S. Supreme 
Court case that affirmed marriage equality nationwide on June 26, 2015. 
This ruling positively impacted the lives of millions of LGBTQIA+ 
Americans and serves as a significant milestone toward equal rights for 
all. I wish to honor the legacies of Jim Obergefell, his late husband 
John Arthur, and all the couples who brought the battle for marriage 
equality to the steps of the United States Supreme Court.
  Furthermore, I would like to honor the incredible activists--Marsha 
P. Johnson, Bayard Rustin, Audre Lorde and Harvey Milk--who played 
instrumental roles in fighting for LGBTQIA+ rights decades before this 
case reached the Supreme Court. To this day, their legacies inspire 
Americans to advocate, celebrate, and respect the differences we have 
as people to promote equal rights. It is fitting that this anniversary 
falls during Pride Month, a time to recognize the strength and 
perseverance of the LGBTQIA+ community as well as a call to action for 
equality.
  Unfortunately, the Trump Administration and extremist Republicans are 
attacking LGBTQIA+ rights around the country. These extremists are 
banning books that feature LGBTQIA+ characters from schools, 
eliminating the suicide prevention hotline for LGBTQIA+ individuals, 
rolling back civil rights protections, and undermining the health, 
military service, and education of LGBTQIA+ Americans. House 
Republicans recently passed a dangerous bill out of Committee that 
threatens to jail parents and doctors offering medically-affirming care 
to trans youth. Policymakers in Washington should not make private 
health decisions for Americans. LGBTQIA+ individuals are humans and 
deserve equal civil rights protections under the law, autonomy, and 
dignity. I reject extremist efforts to promote hate and harm based on 
who one loves or how they self-identify.
  In the face of these intensified efforts to hurt LGBTQIA+ 
individuals, I promise to continue to fight for equal rights for 
LGBTQIA+ Americans. We must protect same-sex marriages and civil rights 
laws for LGBTQIA+ individuals. We must enact the Equality Act that 
would amend the Civil Right Act of 1964 to prohibit discrimination 
based on gender identity and sexual orientation. We must enact my 
bill--the John Lewis Every Child Deserves a Family Act--that would 
prohibit any entity that receives federal child welfare funds from 
discriminating against children, youth, or prospective adoptive or 
foster parents based on religion, sex, sexual orientation, gender 
identity, or marital status. I am committed to continuing to support 
legislation that protects the rights of LGBTQIA+ individuals because 
everyone deserves the right to be who they are, free from 
discrimination.
  Celebration is an act of resistance. In the face of an administration 
that wants to reinvigorate injustice and discrimination against 
LGBTQIA+ people, it is essential to celebrate our countrys landmark 
marriage equality ruling and Pride month and to commit ourselves to 
ensuring that ``We the People includes all Americans.
I rise today to honor the career of Barbara 
Kulig as she retires after twenty-six years of service with the 
Manchester School District. Barbara has dedicated her time as a 
Paraprofessional to making a difference in students education and 
being involved within the community.
  As a lifelong Manchester resident, Barbara dedicated her career to 
public service and giving back to her community. She has spent twenty-
five years teaching at Hillside Middle School, the same institution she 
attended for middle school, and she spent her final year teaching at 
Weston Elementary. She also previously served as a school bus driver in 
Bedford. She has left a lasting impact on the students she has worked 
with over the years and will be greatly missed by students and staff 
alike.
  Barbara is not only a diligent public servant but also an individual 
of outstanding character and passion. She committed tireless days to 
ensuring that the students of the Manchester School District were given 
the care and resources they needed to thrive and grow into successful 
young adults.
  In all, Barbara Kulig represents the very best of Americas public 
servants--dedicated, thoughtful, and unwavering in her commitment to 
service to others. On behalf of a grateful district, I want to 
congratulate Barbara on a well-deserved and restful retirement.
I rise today to recognize 
and commend Mr. Don Hewitt, a trailblazer in sustainable urban 
development and a visionary entrepreneur whose work has made a 
transformative impact on communities throughout Jackson, Mississippi, 
and beyond.
(ATBS), established in 2004 and headquartered in Jackson. 
With more than 20 years of experience in real estate development and 
urban planning, Mr. Hewitt has consistently prioritized community-
centered solutions that emphasize walkability, environmental design, 
and economic opportunity.
  Under his leadership, ATBS has emerged as a leader in mixed-use 
developments that integrate green spaces, affordable housing, retail 
accessibility, and local business engagement. The companys initiatives 
frequently involve partnerships with public housing authorities, 
nonprofit organizations and government entities--leading to the 
revitalization of underutilized spaces into vibrant, inclusive 
neighborhoods.
  Currently, ATBS is collaborating with the West Jackson Community 
Development Corporation and the Jackson Medical Mall Foundation to 
implement an innovative urban streetscape project in West Jackson. This 
development will offer affordable workspace for local entrepreneurs and 
startups, fostering economic opportunity and nurturing local talent.
As a participant in the AI Business Accelerator Cohort, 
he is integrating artificial intelligence into project planning to 
optimize sustainability metrics and enhance community engagement. His 
forward-thinking approach ensures that urban development remains both 
efficient and equitable.
, I am proud to honor Mr. Don Hewitt for his service, 
leadership, and unwavering dedication to building a stronger, more 
inclusive Mississippi. His work exemplifies what it means to develop 
with the community and for the community.
I rise today to recognize the outstanding 
career and lasting contributions of a visionary educator and leader--
. Over nearly four decades in public education, 
including ten transformative years as Superintendent of Richland County 
School District One in Columbia, South Carolina, Dr. Witherspoon has 
been a tireless champion for student achievement, equity, and 
innovation. His work has elevated not only the schools he served, but 
the communities they anchor.
  Dr. Witherspoon began his career as an instrumental music teacher and 
steadily rose through the ranks as a principal, instructional leader, 
and superintendent, with service in four states--Virginia, North 
Carolina, Alabama, and South Carolina. He took the helm of Richland One 
in 2015, leading a diverse, urban-suburban-rural district serving more 
than 22,000 students and employing 4,000 educators and staff.
  Under his leadership, Richland One became a statewide and national 
model of innovation. The district launched South Carolinas first 
Virtual School Program for high school students, as well as the states 
first high school commercial drivers license (CDL) training program 
and firefighter training program. It was also the first in the state to 
offer all 16 nationally recognized career clusters and establish a 
certified pre-apprenticeship program. His focus on early childhood 
education expanded pre-K access and launched the ``ThriveRichland 
initiative for school readiness.
  Dr. Witherspoon guided the district through the unprecedented 
challenges of the COVID-19 pandemic, implementing a comprehensive 
reopening plan to ensure students could return safely to in-person 
instruction. Throughout his tenure, the district intensified family 
engagement, boosted graduation rates beyond the state average, and 
received system-wide accreditation with top-tier evaluation scores.
  He also prioritized summer learning through the districts Summer 
SOAR program and oversaw over $30 million in federal magnet school 
grants, as well as major investments in school facilities--from 
upgraded athletic stadiums to new academic wings focused on culinary 
arts, Montessori, and language immersion.
  Dr. Witherspoons leadership was recognized with numerous awards, 
including 2024 Superintendent of the Year by the South Carolina 
Alliance of Black School Educators, 2022 Superintendent of the Year by 
the S.C. Athletic Administrators Association, and Administrator of the 
Year by several professional education associations. Under his 
guidance, the district and its schools received a remarkable list of 
accolades--from National Blue Ribbon recognition to national awards for 
health, energy conservation, and inclusive education.
, I ask that you and our colleagues join me in honoring 
the extraordinary service of Dr. Craig Witherspoon. His career 
exemplifies the power of education to transform lives and communities. 
He leaves behind a legacy of vision, integrity, and excellence that 
will continue to shape South Carolinas future for generations to come.
I rise today to honor Mr. Arnoldo Moore 
on his retirement from the Social Security Administration after 30 
years of distinguished service.
1994 as a Service 
Representative in Grand Rapids, Michigan, followed by assignments as 
both a Claims Representative and Management Support Specialist. In 
August 2003, Mr. Moore transitioned to Social Security Headquarters in 
Washington, D.C. serving as National Public Affairs Specialist, Human 
Resource Specialist, and Interactive Video Training (IVT) trainer, and 
Systems Analyst. While at headquarters, Mr. Moore was instrumental in 
developing and revising scripts for IVT broadcasts aired nationwide. He 
provided leadership and training to new employees on related programs. 
During his tenure in this role, Mr. Moore traveled the United States 
engaging with groups such as disability services organizations and 
Native American organizations. He prepared meetings for both the 
Commissioner and Acting Commissioner with White House staff to discuss 
Social Security Administration initiatives.
  From August 2003 through April 2025, Mr. Moore served in the 
Chattanooga, Tennessee Field Office as a Public Affairs Specialist. In 
this role, Mr. Moore has served as constituent liaison to my office 
providing outstanding service and support both to my district staff and 
to my constituents.
  Now, Arnoldo enters a new chapter in his life and is looking forward 
to spending more time with his wife, Yaritza, and his children, Aniza 
and Alejandro, while continuing to serve in our community.
  It is with great honor that I recognize Mr. Arnoldo Moore for his 
many years of public service to our Nation and our community, and I 
wish him well in all new endeavors as he begins his retirement.
I rise to recognize Jordana Zubkoff for 
twenty years of outstanding service to this House in several 
administrative and support roles. She lives in Arlington, VA, and I am 
proud to represent her here in Congress.
(CAO) for over twenty years. She 
started in the Immediate Office for the CAO in 2004, and has also 
worked for the Finance Immediate Office, Budget Planning and Analysis, 
and finally in the Office of Payroll and Benefits, starting in 2013.
; her reconciliations, tax 
calculations, and customer service in service to House offices and 
employees, has helped to ensure that their employees have been paid 
accurately while adhering to the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) and 
U.S. House of Representatives standards. Her expertise, experience, and 
courteous attentiveness enabled her to be an invaluable asset to the 
House of Representatives over the years. Ms. Zubkoff is well respected 
by her coworkers and colleagues.
a big fan of traveling; she has gone on many trips 
over the years including Panama, Australia, and a surprise birthday 
cruise this year to South America. Her favorite souvenirs from these 
trips are jewelry made by regional artists with local materials. In her 
retirement, she plans to travel with her family, including her sister, 
niece, and nephew.
  I congratulate Ms. Zubkoff, and I ask my colleagues to join me in 
thanking her for her distinguished service to the House and the Nation 
it serves. I wish her all the best as she begins this new chapter in 
her life.
I rise today to honor my constituent, 
Sergeant Keith Deutsch, a veteran of Operation Iraqi Freedom.
  Sergeant Deutsch enlisted in the United States Army in the summer 
following the attacks of September 11, 2001. He rose through the ranks 
quickly, earning five promotions and receiving the Army Commendation 
Medal, the Bronze Star for Valor, and the Purple Heart.
  In 2003, Keith was wounded by an enemy-fired rocket-propelled grenade 
while serving as an M249 SAW gunner. His squad leader, Staff Sergeant 
Mark A. Lawton, was killed in the same attack. Staff Sergeant Lawton 
died never having lost a Soldier under his command. He ran toward fire, 
shielded his Soldiers, and led from the front. A proud former Marine, 
the Army was Staff Sergeant Lawtons retirement position.
  After recovering from his injuries, Keith helped pioneer the sport of 
adaptive snowboarding, competing on the World Cup Tour and in the 
Winter X Games using prosthetics developed with the Department of 
Veterans Affairs support.
  Keith later returned to New Prague, Minnesota, and reopened his 
fathers business, Rons Cycle Shop, as a Service-Disabled Veteran-
Owned Small Business. Today, it supplies electric bicycles to 
government agencies under contracts with the State of Minnesota and the 
Department of Defense. He is also the founder of the New Prague Area 
Mountain Bike Park.
  In October 2025, Keith will run both the Army Ten-Miler and the 50th 
Marine Corps Marathon as an above-knee amputee in honor of Staff 
Sergeant Mark A. Lawton.
  Sergeant Deutschs life and career is characterized by great personal 
sacrifice and exemplary service. He represents the best that this 
country has to offer. I thank him for his service and dedication to our 
country.
I rise today to recognize 
and honor Colonel Derek C. Oakley on the occasion of his retirement 
from the United States Air Force, concluding an extraordinary career of 
over two decades in service to our Nation.
  Colonel Oakley most recently served as Commander of the 28th Bomb 
Wing at Ellsworth Air Force Base in South Dakota. Under his 
instrumental leadership, the 28th Bomb Wing, home to the largest 
operational B-1 combat wing, provided unmatched global strike 
capabilities and remained a vital part of our national defense.
  Since commissioning through Officer Training School in May 2000, 
Colonel Oakleys record of service has been marked by excellence, 
professionalism, and an unshakable commitment to duty. Over the course 
of his distinguished career, he logged more than 3,400 flight hours, 
including 991 in combat. His career has spanned key leadership roles in 
operations, training, and strategic development.
  He has commanded at multiple levels, served on the Joint Staff, and 
played a vital role in the development of the B-21 Raider, shaping the 
future of American airpower. His service has been recognized with many 
decorations, including the Legion of Merit, the Defense Meritorious 
Service Medal, and multiple Air Medals.
  On behalf of a grateful state and Nation, I thank Colonel Oakley for 
his decades of honorable service. We in South Dakota are proud to call 
him one of our own, and we wish him and his family all the best as they 
begin this new chapter.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in honoring the 
remarkable career and retirement of Colonel Derek C. Oakley.
on Monday, June 23, 2025, 
I was otherwise detained in South Carolina. Had I been present, I would 
have voted YEA on Roll Call No. 172; YEA on Roll Call No. 173; and YEA 
on Roll Call No. 174.
I rise today to recognize and commemorate 
the 10th Anniversary of the Epsilon Sigma Boule of Sigma Pi Phi 
Fraternity, based in Prince William County, Virginia. Since its 
founding on June 13, 2015, Epsilon Sigma Boule has exemplified the 
highest standards of leadership, scholarship, and community service.
  Sigma Pi Phi, also known as the Boule, is the oldest Black Greek-
letter fraternity, established in 1904 to provide a space for African 
American men of professional distinction at a time when few such 
outlets existed. Its legacy includes names etched into the very fabric 
of American history--W.E.B. Du Bois, Martin Luther King, Jr., Arthur 
Ashe, Whitney Young, and so many others whose contributions have shaped 
our Nation. Today, its ranks continue to include influential leaders 
such as Representatives James Clyburn, Bobby Scott, Emanuel Cleaver, 
and Senator Raphael Warnock.
  The Epsilon Sigma Boule of Sigma Pi Phi was established to advance 
this rich legacy in Northern Virginia. Its members are African American 
men of accomplishment and service, representing diverse professions and 
industries. Together, they have embodied the Fraternitys founding 
mission by working diligently to uplift and empower their communities 
through servant leadership and civic engagement.

  Through the Epsilon Sigma Boule Foundation, the fraternity has 
invested substantially in initiatives that serve the greater good--
mentoring youth, increasing access to STEM education, supporting the 
performing arts in Title I schools, and providing college scholarships 
for deserving minority students. These actions reflect a commitment not 
only to excellence, but to ensuring equity and opportunity for all.
  As the Epsilon Sigma Boule celebrates a decade of excellence, we 
honor its enduring mission and the transformational impact it continues 
to have in Prince William County and beyond. They have exemplified 
principled leadership and civic responsibility, carrying forward the 
Fraternitys mission with purposeful action and a steadfast dedication 
to community advancement.
, I ask that my colleagues join me in recognizing the 10th 
Anniversary of the Epsilon Sigma Boule of Sigma Pi Phi Fraternity and 
in celebrating the tremendous work this organization continues to do to 
strengthen our communities and shape the future of our country.
I rise today to recognize Michelle Nuckols 
for being named the 2025 Cattlewoman of the Year by the Tulare County 
Cattlewomens Association.
  Michelle moved to Visalia, California in 1975 with her parents at the 
age of six. She discovered her love for agriculture in high school 
through Mt. Whitney High Schools FFA program, where she quickly 
immersed herself. Her involvement in FFA inspired her to pursue a 
career in agricultural education, leading her to attend the College of 
the Sequoias and later Fresno State University. While at Fresno State, 
Michelle met her husband, Justin Nuckols, who came from a farming 
family in Porterville. The two married in 1995 and made their home near 
Justins family farm. Following graduation, Michelle began teaching at 
Tipton Elementary, where she has now served for over 29 years. In 
addition to teaching English, she offers an agriculture elective that 
introduces students to FFA and Supervised Agricultural Experience (SAE) 
projects. Her class includes hands-on lessons about dairy and beef 
cattle, visits to local farming operations, and a variety of 
experiences designed to connect students to agriculture. Michelle also 
has a deep passion for photography, which has inspired her to preserve 
the farming traditions of Justins family farm through the lens of her 
camera. She captures branding events, assists in tagging calves, and 
most importantly, ensures that donuts and cold drinks are available for 
all who attend.
  Since Justins unexpected passing in 2022, Michelle has taken on a 
more active role in the familys cattle operation alongside her sons, 
Tanner and Carson. She also joined Tulare County Cattlewomen, 
continuing her lifelong support for agricultural education and honoring 
Justins legacy through advocacy and community involvement.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in celebrating Michelle 
Nuckols on being awarded Tulare Countys 2025 Cattlewoman of the Year.
Title IV of Senate Resolution 4, agreed to by the Senate of February 
4, 1977, calls for establishment of a system for a computerized 
schedule of all meetings and hearings of Senate committees, 
subcommittees, joint committees, and committees of conference. This 
title requires all such committees to notify the Office of the Senate 
Daily Digest--designated by the Rules Committee--of the time, place and 
purpose of the meetings, when scheduled and any cancellations or 
changes in the meetings as they occur.
  As an additional procedure along with the computerization of this 
information, the Office of the Senate Daily Digest will prepare this 
information for printing in the Extensions of Remarks section of the 
Congressional Record on Monday and Wednesday of each week.
  Meetings scheduled for Thursday, June 26, 2025 may be found in the 
Daily Digest of todays Record.

                                 JULY 7
     5:30 p.m.
       Committee on Armed Services
       Subcommittee on Airland
         Closed business meeting to markup those provisions which 
           fall under the subcommittees jurisdiction of the 
           proposed National Defense Authorization Act for fiscal 
           year 2026.
                                                           SR-232A

                                 JULY 8
     9:15 a.m.
       Committee on Armed Services
       Subcommittee on Emerging Threats and Capabilities
         Closed business meeting to markup those provisions which 
           fall under the subcommittees jurisdiction of the 
           proposed National Defense Authorization Act for fiscal 
           year 2026.
                                                           SR-232A

     9:30 a.m.
       Committee on Armed Services
       Subcommittee on Personnel
         Business meeting to markup those provisions which fall 
           under the subcommittees jurisdiction of the proposed 
           National Defense Authorization Act for fiscal year 
           2026.
                                                            SD-G50
     10 a.m.
       Committee on Armed Services
       Subcommittee on Readiness and Management Support
         Closed business meeting to markup those provisions which 
           fall under the subcommittees jurisdiction of the 
           proposed National Defense Authorization Act for fiscal 
           year 2026.
                                                           SR-232A
     10:30 a.m.
       Committee on Armed Services
       Subcommittee on Cybersecurity
         Closed business meeting to markup those provisions which 
           fall under the subcommittees jurisdiction of the 
           proposed National Defense Authorization Act for fiscal 
           year 2026.
                                                           SR-232A
     11 a.m.
       Committee on Armed Services
       Subcommittee on Strategic Forces
         Closed business meeting to markup those provisions which 
           fall under the subcommittees jurisdiction of the 
           proposed National Defense Authorization Act for fiscal 
           year 2026.
                                                           SR-232A
     11:30 a.m.
       Committee on Armed Services
       Subcommittee on Seapower
         Closed business meeting to markup those provisions which 
           fall under the subcommittees jurisdiction of the 
           proposed National Defense Authorization Act for fiscal 
           year 2026.
                                                           SR-232A
     2:30 p.m.
       Committee on Armed Services
         Closed business meeting to markup the proposed National 
           Defense Authorization Act for fiscal year 2026.
                                                            SR-222

                                 JULY 9
     9 a.m.
       Committee on Armed Services
         Closed business meeting to continue to markup the 
           proposed National Defense Authorization Act for fiscal 
           year 2026.
                                                            SR-222

                                JULY 10
     9 a.m.
       Committee on Armed Services
         Closed business meeting to continue to markup the 
           proposed National Defense Authorization Act for fiscal 
           year 2026.
                                                            SR-222

                                JULY 11
     9 a.m.
       Committee on Armed Services
         Closed business meeting to continue to markup the 
           proposed National Defense Authorization Act for fiscal 
           year 2026.
                                                            SR-222