I rise today to honor a true champion from 
Northwest Ohio, Cassandra Wilson.
  Cassandra is not only the first woman in Lucas County to bring home 
gold medals four years in a row for Special Olympics Powerlifting, she 
is also a fearless advocate who has served as the first Self Advocate 
from her county on the State Developmental Disabilities Council.
  Since the age of five, Cassandra has been a voice for those too often 
left unheard. Her advocacy, determination, and unbreakable spirit have 
shattered barriers and inspired communities.
  Even when faced with coaches who doubted her, she stood strong.
  She proved--and continues to prove--that strength isnt just about 
lifting weights; its about lifting others up with you.
  She reminds us all that true leadership begins with courage, and true 
change comes from those who never give up. She is not just breaking 
records, shes breaking ground.
  Cassandra is a living example that hard work and confidence, not 
gender or circumstance, defines our potential.
  May her story continue to lift hearts, open minds, and pave the way 
for many more to follow.
I rise today to honor an extraordinary 
woman whose life of faith, service, and leadership has left a lasting 
impact on her community and the Church.
  Mother Regina Rose Edwards, who is celebrating 90 blessed years, is a 
native of River Rouge, Michigan. She has dedicated her life in service 
to her Church and community and has raised a proud family.
  Throughout our Nations history, we have always been inspired by 
those whose faith and unwavering commitment uplifts others. Mother 
Regina Rose Edwards goes beyond these criteria.
  For decades, Mother Edwards has embodied compassion, wisdom, and 
dedication in her role as matriarch within the Church of God in Christ 
and as a beloved member of the Michigan Southwest First Ecclesiastical 
Jurisdiction.
  Her ministry has brought comfort and community to countless families. 
Through prayer, mentorship, and love, she has been a guiding light to 
many.
  As she celebrates her 90th birthday, I wanted to take an opportunity 
to recognize her faith, service, and lifetime of commitment to her 
community.
, the legacy of Mother Regina Rose Edwards is one of 
service over self. I ask my colleagues to join me in recognizing and 
celebrating her remarkable achievements and contributions to our 
Nation, her community, and the Church.
Mr. Chair, I rise today in support of my amendment to the 
Fiscal Year 2026 Defense Appropriations Act, which provides $10 million 
to support testing of tethered unmanned aircraft system prototypes.
  Tethered drones, which are physically connected to a ground-based 
power source, offer critical protection against cyberattacks--an 
increasingly important safeguard given rising threats from adversaries 
like China and North Korea.
  My amendment 275, included in Bipartisan En Bloc No. 2, provides the 
Army with the necessary resources to procure and test tethered drones.
  Tethered drone testing could lead to further innovation and advance 
the Armys mission capabilities.
  I urge my colleagues to support this amendment.
I rise today to honor 
Cinthya Cisneros, a leader and public servant who has been named 
Californias 4th Congressional District 2025 American Dream Award 
Recipient for Napa County. This award recognizes the achievements of 
immigrants in our district who have made remarkable contributions to 
our communities in the areas of Arts and Culture, Professional 
Achievement, Entrepreneurship and Innovation, or Community Service.
, Mexico, as the oldest of three 
siblings and has grown up in Napa since the age of four. She holds a 
Bachelor of Science in Chemistry from Sonoma State University and holds 
a Single Subject Teaching Credential from Sacramento State University.
2018 working as a bartender shortly 
after finishing her last year of teaching high school chemistry. In 
2020, she founded La Cheve Bakery and Brews, a family-owned Mexican 
bakery, craft beer taproom, and restaurant. She is also the owner of 
the upcoming restaurant Con Amor Botanas y Tequila, co-founder of La 
Lucha Wines, and advisory board member of the nonprofit scholarship 
organization 10,000 degrees.
Since 
its founding, La Cheve has provided scholarships for undocumented, 
Latino, and low-income, first-generation college students in the 
science and business field. La Cheve has also supported our community 
through fundraising efforts for organizations such as: If Given a 
Chance, Migrant Farmworkers, LGBTQ Connection, Puertas Abiertas, COPE, 
NEWS, Napa Valley Education Foundation, Red Cross, Mollys Angels, 
IIBA, Mariposa, Napa High School, Vintage High School, Valley Oak High 
School, Napa United, and Girls on the Run.
, who she notes 
as being her biggest role models. At La Cheve, she works alongside 
them. For her work, Ms. Cisneros was recognized as this years American 
Dream Award Recipient in Napa County.
, it is fitting and proper that we honor Cinthya Cisneros 
for her service and dedication to Californias 4th District.
I rise today to honor and mourn the passing 
of Mr. Donald R. Dwight of Holyoke, Massachusetts. Mr. Dwight was a 
Marine, newspaper executive, and dedicated public servant. Born in 
Massachusetts, he attended Deerfield Academy and Princeton before 
serving as an active-duty Marine, where he earned the rank of captain. 
A man dedicated to his country, Mr. Dwight held multiple public 
offices, including serving as the 64th Lieutenant Governor of 
Massachusetts. As Lieutenant Governor, he worked behind the scenes to 
serve his state and always stood up for what he felt was right.
  After leaving public office, Mr. Dwight led newspapers in Minneapolis 
and New England and was responsible for printing seven separate 
publications. He was dedicated to local, independent journalism and 
never hesitated to follow a difficult story.
  Outside of his public life, Mr. Dwight was a loving husband, father, 
and grandfather. To those who knew him, he was endlessly curious, and 
never afraid to try new things. He always knew how to ask the right 
questions and was driven by unflinching dedication to the common good. 
The mark he left on his community, state, and country will never be 
forgotten, and for that, we are forever grateful.
I rise today to honor Edgar 
Ontiveros, a leader and public servant who has been named Californias 
4th Congressional District 2025 American Dream Award Recipient for Lake 
County. This award recognizes the achievements of immigrants in our 
district who have made remarkable contributions to our communities in 
the areas of Arts and Culture, Professional Achievement, 
Entrepreneurship and Innovation, or Community Service.
  For many years, Mr. Ontiveros came to Hidden Valley to visit his 
uncle during the weekends. In 2003, he had the chance to visit 
Clearlake for the first time, sparking his love for the Lake County 
community. By 2004, he had the opportunity to purchase a house in 
Clearlake and has lived in the area ever since.
  In 2009, Mr. Ontiveros joined the staff of Lake County Behavioral 
Health Services (LCBHS) as a Cultural Specialist and Ethnic Services 
Peer Support Specialist. In 2014, LCBHS created the La Voz De la 
Esperanza community center, appointing Mr. Ontiveros as the centers 
supervisor. The La Voz, or the Latino Wellness Center, located in 
Clearlake, works to connect the Latino Community to culturally relevant 
service and ensure that Spanish speakers are equipped with tools to 
navigate health and wellness services. With volunteer translators and 
various educational opportunities, they help to break the language 
barrier that often prevents people from seeking help and offer 
referrals for mental health services when requested.
, help to navigate the health care system, and a sense of 
community and support. As a Certified Medi-Cal Peer Support Specialist, 
he works to assess critical needs of Latino community members regarding 
mental health services and support clients, both individual and family.
, implement, and 
maintain activities and programs related to the Latino Wellness Center. 
He recruits and trains volunteers and develops relationships with 
partner agencies and community entities. Additionally, Mr. Ontiveros 
connects Latino community members to services through the Behavioral 
Health Department, providing key mental health services for those who 
may not otherwise have access.
Mr. Ontiveros has taken to the front lines of 
community support following the countless fires that devastated Lake 
County, communicating important information and ensuring that Lake 
County residents have equitable access to emergency services and 
necessities during major disasters. Mr. Ontiveros is an ordained 
minister and faith leader. He works as a preacher in Middletown for the 
South Lake County community.
, it is fitting and proper that we honor La Voz director 
Edgar Ontiveros for his service, leadership, and dedication to the Lake 
County community.
I rise today to honor a 
remarkable servant, Mr. Larry Hooper.
  Born and raised in Natchez, Mississippi, Larry Hooper is a third-
generation educator

who is deeply committed to ensuring that students have access to high-
quality educational opportunities.
a teacher, basketball coach, reading program 
facilitator, Job Training Partnership/General Education Diploma 
Supervisor, high school graduation coach, assistant principal, and 
principal, accumulating 21 years of administrative experience.
  He was named Teacher of the Year at Hazlehurst Elementary School in 
1999. As a basketball coach, he led teams to championships in both 
Vicksburg and Port Gibson. Mr. Hooper has also played a key role in 
helping William Winans Middle School and Natchez Freshman Academy exit 
School Improvement Status.
  A God-fearing and family-oriented individual, Mr. Hooper is a proud 
parent of a son and a daughter and remains very active in the Natchez 
community.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in recognizing Mr. Larry 
Hooper for his outstanding service and achievements in the Natchez, 
Claiborne, and Wilkinson County communities of Mississippi.
I rise today to honor the 
25th anniversary of the St. Helena High School Agricultural Program, an 
esteemed organization of our Napa community. This milestone reflects 
decades of dedication, community support, and profound impact on 
students futures. This program is more than just an educational 
opportunity; it is a cornerstone of the community.
  The Agriculture Program at St. Helena High School aims to shape young 
minds, nurture responsible leaders, and prepare students for successful 
careers in agriculture and beyond. This program not only fosters 
practical skills and knowledge but also instills values such as 
stewardship, leadership, and community service in our students.
  The St. Helena Agriculture Program has touched the lives of over 
3,500+ students in the St. Helena community through positive 
experiences in relevant, rigorous, and relationship driven coursework 
and involvement in the National Future Farmers of America Organization. 
These opportunities have been made possible by the financial backing of 
the St. Helena Agriculture Booster Organization.
  The Ag Boosters have supported state-of-the-art facilities 
improvements, curriculum development and equipment, student travel, 
student leadership conference participation, supervised agricultural 
experience participation, and making sure that all students can take 
advantage of what the Future Farmers of America and Agriculture 
Education have to offer.
, it is fitting and proper that we honor the St. Helena 
High School Agricultural Program on the 25th anniversary of their 
founding. Through their advocacy, leadership, and commitment to 
excellence, they have become a cornerstone of our Napa Countys 
agricultural community.
I rise today to honor the life of Reginald 
Adams Berry, a devoted husband and father. A native of Washington, 
D.C., Reginald remained in his hometown, building a loving family and 
distinguished career as an architect.
  Among his great accomplishments was his devotion to family--his wife, 
Sonceria Ann Berry, and daughter, Elizabeth Ruth Berry. A native of 
Birmingham, Alabama in my district, Ann got her start in the Senate as 
a staffer for U.S. Senator Howell Heflin in Alabama, rising through the 
ranks to serve as the first Black

woman Secretary of the U.S. Senate from 2021 to 2025. I know I speak 
for all of us in expressing our gratitude to the Berry Family for 
decades of service to their country and to their Congress. We will 
continue to keep Ann, Elizabeth, and their family in our prayers.
  On behalf of Alabamas 7th Congressional District, I ask my 
colleagues to join me in celebrating the extraordinary life of Reginald 
Berry.
I rise today to congratulate Anusha Arora 
on being the Gold Medal recipient at the Washington State Science and 
Engineering Fair for her project titled ``Smart Strings: A Novel Low-
Cost Multimodal System for Intelligent Sensory Feedback through 
Artificial Intelligence. The Washington State Science and Engineering 
Fair aims to advance the studies of STEM in grades 1-12 through the 
State of Washington. They work to provide opportunities for students to 
display their projects and provide support and guidance for the 
operation of science and engineering fairs throughout Washington State.
  Additionally, Anusha had the opportunity to represent Washington 
State at the 2025 Regeneron International Science and Engineering Fair. 
For more than 70 years, thousands of students from various science fair 
networks have explored their passion for scientific research at the 
worlds largest pre-college science competition. Students from more 
than 75 countries, regions and territories competed across 21 different 
STEM disciplines. This year, Anusha competed among the top young 
scientists from around the globe and was selected as a Grand Award 
Winner in the category of ``Technology Enhances the Arts. Anusha 
Arora attends Interlake High School in Washingtons 1st Congressional 
District.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in celebrating Anusha 
Arora and this victory for science education in Washington. Her work 
demonstrates not only exceptional scientific excellence, but a deep 
commitment to addressing real world challenges. We are grateful for her 
contributions to the scientific community and wish her a successful 
career.
I rise today to celebrate the outstanding 
contributions of Mr. Lee Vent, a lifelong administrator and educator, 
who was recently recognized as a Legacy Leader by the Arkansas 
Association of Educational Administrators. The organization is 
dedicated to supporting and enhancing educational leadership in 
Arkansas through various initiatives and legislative advocacy. This 
prestigious award recognizes individuals who have demonstrated 
exceptional leadership and made significant contributions to the field 
of education in Arkansas.
56-year 
career in education, including 43 continuous years as a Superintendent, 
making him the longest continuously serving Superintendent in Arkansas. 
He currently serves as the President of the Great Rivers ESC Board of 
Directors and Superintendent of the Clarendon-Holly Grove School 
District. Mr. Vent is a strong testament to the vision, compassion, and 
resilience demonstrated by thousands of Arkansas educators.
a three-room schoolhouse, which 
had no indoor plumbing. He has spent most of his educational career in 
schools along the Mississippi Delta, or what he calls ``the pure 
Delta. He has dedicated his life to selflessly serving the community, 
and ensuring students are prepared for a promising and successful 
future. Mr. Vent embodies the very best of American educators, 
fostering a knowledgeable, collaborative, curious, and innovative 
learning environment for all.
-recognized through his strength 
in personal and organizational communication and constant improvement 
of administrative knowledge and skills. His deep commitment to 
transforming our community through educational resources brings great 
pride to our district.
  It is my honor to congratulate Lee Vent on his recognition as a 
Legacy Leader and for his decades of service. I thank him for 
preserving the legacy of learning. I wish him continued success, and 
may his actions continue to encourage others.