it is my honor to recognize and celebrate 
World War II veteran Raymond Francis Patnaude, who turns 100 years old 
this week.
  Born on August 9, 1923, Raymond embodies what it means to be a member 
of the ``Greatest Generation. When the forces of fascism threatened 
the peace, security, and freedom of millions upon millions, Raymond 
answered the call to serve, enlisting in the Army and eventually 
serving in the 97th Infantry ``Trident Division.
  President Ronald Reagan reminded us that freedom is fragile and must 
constantly be fought for and guarded by each generation. That noble 
mission is exactly what Raymond helped carry out when he wore the 
uniform of the United States Military. Because of the service and 
sacrifice of veterans, generations of Americans have been able to 
experience the blessings of liberty and live in a land that is free. 
For that, all of us owe Raymond and his fellow veterans a debt that we 
can never fully repay.
  Following his military service, Raymond and his late wife Beulah 
settled in South Bend, where Raymond bought and successfully operated 
McDonald Studio, the oldest photography studio in the South Bend area. 
In fact, many high school alumni from South Bend from the past half-
century came to McDonald Studio for their senior photos. Others came to 
know Raymond and his professionalism along with his kind, generous 
nature at weddings, communions, and community engagements.
  Together, Raymond and Beulah also had five children together: Ray 
Jr., David, Philip, Chris and Paulette. All five children worked in the 
studio at some point, which is a testament to the loving and tight-knit 
family that Raymond and Beulah built.
  As Raymond celebrates with his family a century of life well lived, I 
join countless Hoosiers in wishing Raymond a very Happy 100th Birthday. 
I also commend him for his loyal service and the many, many 
contributions he has made to the South Bend community, Indianas Second 
Congressional District, and our country. Godspeed Raymond.
I rise today to congratulate the town of 
Wolfeboro, New Hampshire for hosting the first ever Lake Winnipesaukee 
Day celebration. Lake Winnipesaukee is 1 of the treasures of our state, 
a recreation and tourism hub, and an economic driver for the entire 
region. Above all, it is a precious natural resource and habitat that 
we must continue to protect and preserve for generations to come. With 
proceeds benefiting advocacy groups fighting to preserve the quality of 
the lake, Lake Winnipesaukee Day is a shining example of Wolfeboros 
commitment to keeping Lake Winnipesaukee clean and healthy for years to 
come.
  The Lake Winnipesaukee Day celebration brings together 8 different 
non-profit climate advocacy organizations to educate visitors and 
highlight the importance of climate action and preservation in the Lake 
Winnipesaukee region. The celebrations live laser shows, food, drinks, 
games, and music have worked to create an engaging local space that 
will serve as both an opportunity and prominent platform for climate 
groups to advocate and educate. New Hampshires way of life is rooted 
in our natural surroundings, and it is the responsibility of each and 
every 1 of us to ensure that future generations can enjoy the benefits 
and beauty of our natural environment. I sincerely commend Wolfeboros 
work to raise awareness and forge an impassioned, strong community of 
well-informed citizens, and I look forward to many more Lake 
Winnipesaukee Day celebrations in the future.
  On behalf of my constituents in New Hampshires First Congressional 
District, I want to congratulate the Town of Wolfeboro for its 
dedication to the protection of Lake Winnipesaukee, and the work it has 
done to educate and advocate for climate change action. I am proud to 
represent residents of Wolfeboro in Congress, and I cant wait to see 
the success of this celebration in the years to come.
I rise today to honor KBBF 
and the Bilingual Broadcasting Foundation to recognize their 50 years 
of providing reliable, bilingual public radio for the North Bay.
  The Bilingual Broadcasting Foundation was founded in 1971 with KBBFs 
first broadcast airing in 1973. Spurred on by the Chicano movement, 
KBBFs founders pioneered a new model to engage our entire community in 
all public broadcastings benefits of education, culture, and news 
access. KBBF is the first bilingual, bicultural radio station in the 
United States of America. Today, the station reaches five million 
households and specializes in English, Spanish, and several indigenous 
languages. Of their many listeners, one million are from primarily 
Spanish-speaking households.
  Since 1973, KBBF has been primarily run by volunteers. Their team 
remains a critical source of information for many Spanish-speaking 
members of our community. In 2017, when numerous wildfires devastated 
Sonoma and Napa Counties, KBBF was instrumental in helping to translate 
lifesaving evacuation guidance for Spanish-speaking residents of our 
region who were seeking critical public safety news.
  In recognition of their decades of work, KBBF was honored with the 
2020 Silver Heart Award by the Northern California Chapter of the 
Society of Professional Journalists. The station has been a vital 
resource of information and services for the Latino community. KBBF is 
vital in increasing access to information at the local, state, and 
national level.
, it is evident that that, for half a century, KBBF has 
been an outstanding public broadcasting service for our multilingual 
population in Northern California.
I rise today with Congressman Mike Thompson 
to honor the memory of highly regarded, fourth-generation wine grower 
Paul Eagan Dolan, III, who passed away on June 26, 2023.
  Born in Oakland, California in 1950, Paul spent his childhood summers 
at his familys Asti Villa in Sonoma County. His mothers family 
heritage includes Pietro Carlo Rossi, the Italian immigrant who founded 
the Italian Swiss Colony Winery. Pauls summers in Asti inspired his 
passion for winemaking.
  Paul graduated from Bishop ODowd High School in 1968. He earned a 
Bachelor of Arts degree from Santa Clara University while also serving 
in the Reserve Officer Training Corps (ROTC). After three years of 
military service, Paul moved to Fresno, CA, where he earned a Masters 
in Enology at California State University in 1977.
  Upon graduation, Paul started his first winemaking job with Fetzer 
Vineyards, where he worked for 27 years, eventually serving as 
President. The business flourished under his leadership. In 1991 Fetzer 
was rebranded as Bonterra Wines, the first national brand made from 100 
percent organically grown grapes. Pauls notable achievements included 
being named Winemaker of the Year by the LA Times in 1991. During this 
period, he also founded a small distribution of wine under the Dolan 
Vineyards brand.
  Paul passionately believed business could be a force for good, and 
throughout his life, he demonstrated beneficial practices for 
sustainable wine production. In 2002, he held the first biodynamic 
symposium in the United States, which was joined by winegrowers from 
across the globe. After helping to establish the Wine Institutes 
Sustainable Winegrowers Alliance, and becoming its first chairman, he 
helped introduce the Code of Sustainable Wine Growing. In 2003 he 
memorialized his theory for business as a positive force in his 
watershed book titled ``True to Your Roots: Fermenting a Business 
Revolution.
  Paul continued to share his commitment to organic, biodynamic, and 
regenerative farming as he became Chairman of the Wine Institute in 
2006. Paul would go on to serve as Chairman of the Demeter USA board, 
where his influence on winegrowing expanded to international audiences 
through the International Biodynamic Wine Conference. He was the first 
wine industry representative on the Regenerative Organic Alliance.
  Pauls legacy includes powerful demonstrations of the benefits of 
biodynamic principles, including the transformation of a run-down 156-
acre hillside property in rural Mendocino County into the vibrant, 
lush, and sustainably farmed Dark Horse Ranch; and the more recent 
creation of Truett-Hurst Winery, home to

26 acres of biodynamic certified estate vines, set amid a remarkable 
backdrop of a restored creek and riparian areas, home to fish, fowl, 
and wildlife.
, Pauls passion for biodynamic and organic farming was 
rooted in his deep respect for natural cycles, his reverence for the 
land, and his belief that agricultural business has responsibility 
beyond generating profit to preserving and restoring land. We 
respectfully ask that you join us in extending deep condolences to 
Pauls family and many friends, and in expressing our strong 
appreciation for Pauls decades of leadership in responsible winemaking 
and sustainability.
I rise today to remember the life of a 
tremendously impactful leader and my good friend, Stamfords own 
Reverend Tommie Jackson. Dr. Jackson was born in Baltimore, Maryland, 
the third of 6 children. Dr. Jackson was raised in Baltimore City and 
was a product of the Baltimore Public School System. He graduated from 
Baltimore City College High School and attended the prestigious 
Morehouse University in Georgia. He later attended the University of 
Maryland, Baltimore County, where he met his wife, and life partner, 
Dorye Michelle Emory.
  Dr. Jackson and Dorye were married in 1977 and shortly after moved to 
Houston, Texas where he attended Texas Southern University in pursuit 
of his Juris Doctor. The Jacksons would later return to Baltimore, 
Maryland where he completed law school at the University of Maryland 
Law School.
. He answered his first call to Pastorship in 1990, at 
Calvary Baptist Church in Chester, Pennsylvania. While there, Dr. 
Jackson, Dorye and his daughters touched the lives of the community. 
Dr. Jacksons dedication to Gods work then brought him and his family 
to Stamford, Connecticut in 1997, where he answered his second calling 
to Pastorship at Faith Tabernacle Missionary Baptist Church.
  For 20 years, Dr. Jackson served as the Pastor of Faith Tabernacle. 
During his tenure at Faith, he spearheaded the expansion of his church. 
He served the Stamford community with a weekly food bank and held back-
to-school drives to equip children and families with supplies. Dr. 
Jackson was a proponent of education and took the time to mentor and 
prepare students in the congregation and in the community for academic 
excellence. Upon completing his doctorate degree at New York 
Theological Seminary, he went on to become

part of the faculty, leading, guiding and mentoring aspiring faith 
leaders. Dr. Jackson served as a spiritual advisor and mentor for the 
congregation and for the community.
  In 2018, Dr. Jackson founded the Rehoboth Followship Church. He was 
diligent in fostering this ministry and created a welcoming place of 
worship for all. He loved his Rehoboth family and was always thinking 
of ways to expand the ministry.
  I was honored to join Dr. Jackson in his tireless work to bring 
together faith leaders, register and empower voters, combat the scourge 
of gun violence in our communities, remedy the historic wrongs of our 
criminal justice system, and inspire the next generation to seize 
opportunities to get an education and improve the world they will soon 
enter.
  Whenever they needed something good for the community done, they 
didnt have to seek out Dr. Jackson. He was already there, and he 
welcomed them with open arms. Dr. Jackson was a tremendous advocate for 
his community, at the local and state level, and I was proud to call 
him my friend.
  This world has lost a great leader. I dedicate today to mourning and 
remembrance as well as furthering Dr. Jacksons legacy of service and 
sacrifice and uplifting those who follow in his path. May we all be 
even half as successful as Dr. Jackson was at leaving the world a 
better place than we found it.
I rise today to honor the 
life of William Dilday.
  William Dilday was born on September 14, 1937 in Boston, 
Massachusetts. He graduated from the Boston Latin School and received 
his B.S. degree in Business Administration from Boston University in 
Boston, Massachusetts.
  In 1964, Dilday started his career as an operations supervisor at 
IBM. In 1968, Dilday became the personnel administrator and public 
relations director at Edgerton, Germehausen, &amp; Grier, Inc. He then 
began working at WHDH-TV in Boston as director of personnel in 1969. 
Dilday then entered the field of journalism in 1972 as general manager 
of WLBT-TV/WLBM-TV in Jackson, Mississippi, as the first African 
American general manager of a network affiliate station. He worked at 
WLBT-TV/WLBM-TV until 1984. As chief operation officer, he led the 
station to achieve number one in Nielson and Arbitron ratings from 
November 1973 to February 1984.
  In 1990, Dilday joined WJTV-TV as general manager and executive vice 
president, where he implemented operation and programming plans that 
improved station ratings. After his departure from WJTV, Dilday joined 
NewsPress and Gazette as corporate vice president. Dilday was then 
hired as president and chief executive officer of Kerimax 
Communications, Inc. Dilday has also spent time as a guest columnist 
for the Jackson Clarion-Ledger in Jackson, Mississippi.
  Dilday has received numerous awards and recognitions, including the 
Peabody Award, the National Mental Health Association Media Award, and 
two Iris Awards from the National Association of Television Program 
Executives.
  In addition to his career in journalism, Dilday has been active in 
many organizations and companies. He has served as a board member for 
First American Bank. Dilday has also been a board member of the 
National Association of Television Broadcasters and the National 
Broadcasting Company Affiliate Board. He has served as a member of the 
Congressional Black Caucus Communication Task Force, as well as a 
founding member of the National Association of Black Journalists and 
100 Black Men. From 1978 until 1979, Dilday served as president of the 
Jackson Urban League.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in honoring the life, 
legacy, and service of William Dilday.
I rise today to mourn the loss of an 
exemplary first responder and citizen, Jeffrey Post of Gales Ferry, 
Connecticut. Jeffrey served nobly in his role as Assistant Fire Chief 
for the Submarine Base New London Fire Department. He very sadly passed 
August 2nd lovingly surrounded by his family and colleagues.
  Born to Steven and Cynthia Post in July 1979, it became apparent at 
an early age that Jeffreys destiny lay in service to his fellow 
citizens. By the age of 14, he joined the Old Mystic Fire Departments 
junior cadet program, beginning a journey in fire and rescue which 
would define his life. This cadet program additionally ingrained the 
spirit of volunteerism in Jeffrey, and he would happily dedicate his 
personal time to fire departments across the southeast Connecticut 
region. For example, he volunteered with the Mystic Fire Department 
Hook and Ladder Company, Gales Ferry Fire Company, and acted as the 
Chief of Center Groton Fire Department.
  Jeffreys actual professional firefighting journey began in 1999 when 
he joined the Mohegan Tribal Fire Department. Soon after, he would 
continue his emergency response services by joining the SUBASE Fire 
Department in 2001. In this position, Jeffrey would help maintain the 
United States national defense by ensuring the safety of those 
stationed in SUBASE through his knowledge of EMT and HAZMAT rescue 
practices. It is in SUBASE where Asst. Chief Post would become the 
fixture of southeast Connecticuts firefighting community that he is 
known as today. By 2009, Jeffrey was promoted to Captain in the SBFD. 
In 2015, he found himself the role of Assistant Chief. Throughout his 
distinguished career, Jeffrey cultivated a reputation for bravery, 
intelligence, and team-oriented leadership, qualities which 
distinguished his already impressive firefighting knowledge base.
  Jeffrey didnt hoard his incredible knowledge to himself. Instead, he 
served as a fire instructor for a large portion of his career, ensuring 
that the fantastic amount of institutional knowledge he amassed 
throughout his career would inform the next generation of firefighters. 
Jeffrey served as adjunct faculty for both the Eastern Connecticut Fire 
School and Connecticut Fire Academy, two institutions which provide 
critical EMT and fire training. In 2014, Jeffrey took his teaching one 
step further by opening a training company with some of his colleagues 
named All Hands Operating.
  In one anecdote that typifies the incredible reach of Asst. Chief 
Posts fire fighting abilities, Jeffrey organized and led the SBFDs 
response team to aid in suppressing a blazing inferno that ultimately 
destroyed the USS Miami, a Los Angeles class submarine at the 
Portsmouth Naval Shipyard in Kittery, Maine. That fire lasted an 
astonishing 12 hours that local firefighters were unable to contain. 
The chief and his team drove through the night to provide their unique 
training to extinguish the blaze. Temperatures from the fire exceeded 
1,000 degrees, melting the innards of Miami, yet because of the 
expertise of the SUBASE Fire Department no lives were lost. More 
recently, Jeffrey used his knowledge and experience to rescue a man who 
fell down a 30 foot well in Ledyard, Connecticut. It was due to 
Jeffreys technical ability and expertise in confined space rescue that 
allowed for a swift resolution to what could have amounted to a dire 
circumstance for the man who fell.
, although we mourn the profound loss our region has 
experienced in the passing of Asst. Chief Post, we can take solace in 
his inspiring legacy of the lives he saved, and the countless 
colleagues he has positively impacted throughout his life--whether as a 
rescuer or mentor. It is during this time that we pay special attention 
to Jeffreys family, his wife Chrissy; two children, Olivia and John; 
brothers Scott and Daniel; parents Steven and Cynthia; and extended 
family. To this end, I ask that my colleagues in this chamber join me 
in honoring the example left by Asst. Chief Post.
today, I introduce the Commission of Fine 
Arts District of Columbia Home Rule Act. This bill would remove the 
authority of the Commission of Fine Arts (CFA) over non-federal real 
property in the District of Columbia.
  Under presidential executive orders (EOs) and federal law, the CFA 
has review authority for D.C.-owned parks and buildings, as well as for 
certain private land in D.C. Under the relevant EOs, CFA has review 
authority for the design of D.C.-owned parks and buildings. Under the 
Shipstead-Luce Act, CFA has review authority for the design of private 
buildings in D.C. ``adjacent to public buildings and grounds of major 
importance, such as Rock Creek Park and the Potomac riverfront. Under 
the Old Georgetown Act, the CFA has review authority for the design of 
private buildings in the part of Georgetown referred to as ``Old 
Georgetown in the act.
  The federal government, including the CFA, whose members are 
appointed by the President, has no business in D.C. land-use policies 
and decisions unrelated to the federal presence. Not only is the 
federal governments authority over D.C. buildings and private property 
a violation of home rule, it also delays and increases the cost of 
public and private development in D.C.
  This bill is an important step to increase home rule for D.C. I urge 
my colleagues to support it.
I rise today to congratulate 
and recognize the 65th Anniversary of Operation Sunshine, a scientific 
expedition on behalf of the United States Navy that sent our Nations 
first nuclear submarine, the USS Nautilus, to the North Pole.
  Nicknaming themselves ``PANOPOs, an acronym from the phrase 
``Pacific to the Atlantic via the North Pole, one-hundred and sixteen 
crew members made the historic voyage under the polar ice, showing true 
American dominance in science, innovation, and naval capability.
  On behalf of Pennsylvanias 13th Congressional District, I am proud 
to recognize the 65th Anniversary of Operation Sunshine and thank both 
Nautilus Alumni Association and the Submarine Force Library and Museum 
Association for their dedication to keeping American history alive.
I rise today to recognize the 150th 
anniversary of the founding of the Homer Fire Department in Cortland 
County, New York.
  The Homer Fire Department was established on April 10, 1873 as part 
of the Village of Homer. Since then, the all-volunteer department has 
worked tirelessly to protect the citizens of Homer and has served as a 
backbone of their community.
, I ask that my colleagues in the House join me in 
recognizing the Homer Fire Department on their 150th anniversary. It is 
my sincere privilege to honor all the volunteer firefighters who have 
kept Homer safe since 1873 and continue to do so today.
I rise today to recognize Tom Sigmund for 
his service and accomplishments as the executive director of NEW Water 
and president of the National Association of Clean Water Agencies.
, as well as promoting a national water policy to 
create a more equitable water future. On July 13, 2023, Mr. Sigmund 
completed his service as president of the National Association of Clean 
Water Agencies. I stand today to recognize Mr. Sigmunds impressive 
leadership at NACWA as well as his service to the clean water industry.
  Since 2007, Mr. Sigmund has led NEW Water, the brand of the Green Bay 
Metropolitan Sewerage District, as its executive director, facilitating 
the delivery of the utilitys wholesale conveyance and treatment 
services to 238,000 people throughout 15 municipalities in Northeast 
Wisconsin. Under Mr. Sigmunds leadership, NEW Water has achieved 100 
percent permit compliance and ushered in a new era for the utility in 
recognizing that material sent to the facilities is a valuable resource 
to be recovered and reused. He orchestrated the Resource Recovery and 
Electrical Energy, or R2E2, project, which recovers valuable resources 
from the wastewater stream to produce electricity and recovers heat for 
processes that run the facility.
a circular reclaimed water system that 
was developed with a national paper mill, boosting economic development 
for the region, and providing a sustainable solution for the industry. 
These efforts 
target a reduction of sediment and excess nutrient run-off into 
impaired waterways, an improved ecosystem, and a pathway for continued 
success.
  Under his leadership, NEW Water entered a partnership with NASA to 
advance scientific knowledge of harmful algal blooms and their impact 
on public health. This initiative is housed under NEW Waters Aquatic 
Monitoring Program, which was established in 1986 and is one of the 
longest running water quality monitoring programs on the Great Lakes. 
&amp; Girls Club to build 
critical skillsets, inspire water stewardship, and establish a talent 
pipeline for future employees.
  During the early stages of the pandemic, NEW Water joined the 
Wisconsin Wastewater Surveillance Program to advance public health 
efforts to understand COVID-19 in the community. Mr. Sigmund received 
his Bachelor and Master of Science in Civil and Environmental 
Engineering from the University of Wisconsin. A licensed professional 
engineer in Wisconsin and Ohio, he has served and continues to serve on 
board and leadership positions at various organizations. He chaired the 
Water Resources Utility of the Future Task Force, which developed the 
Water Resources Utility of the Future Blueprint for Action. He served 
as a member of the Utility Advisory Group, where he helped develop 
publications on Effective Utility Management related to water and 
wastewater utilities, as well as other sustainability efforts. A 
recipient of the NACWA Presidents Award, Mr. Sigmund is also a Water 
Environment Federation, or WEF, fellow. He has received the WEF William 
D. Hatfield Award and the WEF Schroepfer Innovative Facility Design 
Medal.
  These accolades and awards attest to Mr. Sigmunds dedication to the 
clean water industry. His strong character and visionary leadership 
have been instrumental in charting a course for improved water quality, 
particularly in Lake Michigans Green Bay. I thank Mr. Sigmund for his 
commitment to Northeast Wisconsin, and I congratulate him on completing 
his service as NACWA president.
I rise today to honor the life and service 
of Easley, South Carolina Police Officer, Matthew Hare, who was killed 
in the line of duty on August 2, 2023, while saving the life of an 
individual suffering from a mental health crisis. Officer Hare was 
driven by a desire to serve his community which led to his pursuing a 
career in law enforcement upon graduation from Easley High School. 
Officer Hare is survived by his mother, Ashley Hare, in addition to his 
brother, Easton Hare.
  At only 22 years of age, Officer Hare had just begun his career in 
2022 and showed great promise after completing the SC Criminal Justice 
Academy.
  When not on duty, he loved to be with his family and friends at the 
dinner table, outside on their next adventure, or playing the latest 
video game. Despite many hobbies, Officer Hare always found time to 
cheer on his favorite football team, the Clemson Tigers.
  On August 2, Officer Hare displayed the greatest form of love and act 
of service that can be asked of any police officer. He responded to a 
call for an individual who was suffering from a mental health crisis 
and was precariously on the train tracks in Easley. Knowing a train was 
coming and committed to saving this person he didnt know, Officer Hare 
sacrificed himself to save a member of the community he swore to serve 
and protect.
, South Carolinas Third District is known for its people 
and is home to countless heroes. Im honored to recognize Officer 
Matthew Hare, a hero who was taken from us far too soon. Ashley and 
Easton will carry the fond memories of Officer Hare in their hearts 
forever, and Easley will remember this demonstration of selfless 
service. Officer Hares final actions truly exemplify John 15:13, 
``Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for 
his friends. Thank Officer Hare for choosing to serve and giving us a 
great example of how we ought to love others. The Easley community 
learned this lesson as is evident by the outpouring of support for him 
and his family since his passing. Today, my thoughts and prayers are 
with the Hare family and the Easley Police Department as they lay to 
rest Officer Hare.
I rise today to welcome Command Sergeant 
Major Tammy M. Everette to Fort Bliss as the new Commandant of the 
Noncommissioned Officer (NCO) Leadership Center of Excellence and 
Sergeants Major Academy.
  Command Sgt. Major Everette has served over 27 years of active 
military service and will now be the first woman to assume the duties 
and responsibilities of the 24th Commandant in the Academys 51-year 
history. As Commandant of the NCO Leadership Center of Excellence and 
Sergeants Major Academy, she will continue to advance the Academys 
mission of providing the best professional military education to our 
future Sergeant Majors to become holistically fit, disciplined, and 
well-educated professionals who are ready for challenges of large-scale 
combat operations.
  She has served across the country and worldwide in various leadership 
roles and has received numerous awards and decorations including the 
Legion of Merit (2OLC), the Bronze Star Medal (1OLC), the Defense 
Meritorious Service Medal, the Meritorious Service Medal (3 OLC), the 
Joint Service Commendation Medal, and the Army Commendation Medal (1 
OLC) among many others.
  Command Sgt. Major Tammy M. Everette is doing tremendous work to 
develop and provide holistic, effective, and pedagogically sound 
education to further advance military excellence. It is my distinct 
privilege today to celebrate her military service to our country and 
welcome her in her new role as 24th Commandant of the NCO Leadership 
Center of Excellence and Sergeants Major Academy.