I rise today to recognize 
the Greenville Mississippi Alumni Chapter of Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity 
Inc. for their 70 years of service.
  The Greenville Mississippi Alumni Chapter of Kappa Alpha Psi 
Fraternity, Inc. was chartered on February 14, 1954, by the late G.P. 
Maddox, he late B.L. Bell, the late Dr. Charles Holmes, the late Ray 
Brooks, the late A.C. Isaac, the late Robert Hall, the late Dr. Henry 
St. Hille, the late Sunny Kyles, and the late Arthur B. Peyton, Sr.
  Today, the brothers who make up the alumni chapter are from 
Mississippi, Tennessee, and Arkansas.
  The Greenville Mississippi Alumni Chapter has sought ways to 
acknowledge brothers within their chapter who have made individual 
achievements in their path of life.
  Seventy years of the Greenville Mississippi Alumni Chapter has come 
with scholarship awards for men and women to highlight citizens who 
have contributed to serving the community, exceptional educational 
achievement, professional achievement, service to the fraternity, 
outstanding leadership, and brotherhood.
  Their continual leadership and service around Greenville, MS, and the 
greater Mississippi Delta have contributed positively to the region. 
Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity, Inc. has sponsored events such as football 
bowl games, high school Greek shows, all-star basketball games, Miss 
Kappa Alpha Psi pageants, and the Arthur B. Peyton golf tournament. The 
chapter has also participated in the United Way housing initiative and 
pioneered events such as the inaugural All-White and Jean social events 
and New Years with the Nupes.
  Celebrating 70 years of service is only possible with the hard work 
and dedication of brothers who have committed their time and effort to 
their fraternity.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in recognizing the 
Greenville Mississippi Alumni Chapter of Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity, 
Inc.
host of the popular radio show, Hawkeye 
in the Morning, Mark ``Hawkeye Louis is an avid baseball card 
collector. Since his childhood, Hawkeye spent years collecting Major 
League Baseball cards, with the collection eventually totaling an 
impressive 17,000 cards. Instead of letting the collection continue to 
collect dust, he decided to give back to our community by selling the 
cards and donating the proceeds.
  Hawkeye decided the enormous impact of donating the more than $10,000 
in proceeds would make him more proud than hanging onto the cards ever 
could. His background in volunteer work and fundraising at DFW 
childrens hospitals made Cook Childrens Hospital in Fort Worth the 
perfect choice.
  Hawkeyes story is inspiring and his selfless donation will help 
hundreds of children in our district. I want to thank Mark ``Hawkeye 
Louis for his ongoing support of North Texas children and childrens 
hospitals throughout our community.
I rise today to extend my 
warmest congratulations to Community Options on their 35th anniversary.
  Community Options is a non-profit organization based in New Jersey, 
and it is dedicated to promoting self-determination and community 
involvement for people with intellectual and development disabilities. 
By providing these individuals with accessible housing and equipping 
them with skills to pursue careers of their choice, Community Options 
has changed more than 5,000 lives. This exceptional organization has 
tackled barriers that historically impeded people with disabilities, 
and in doing so they have brought extraordinary vibrancy, creativity, 
and diversity to our communities. New Jersey is both proud and grateful 
to house the headquarters of this exceptional organization.
  I wish Community Options the best of luck as they continue with their 
outstanding work. It has been a true pleasure to watch their 
organization grow and prosper over the past 35 years, and I have no 
doubt that they will touch many more lives in the future.
I rise today to honor the life and legacy of 
Lieutenant Colonel Elza Perry, Jr., a true American hero who served in 
the United States Air Force, who recently passed away at age 90.
  Before his military service, Lt. Col. Elza Perry, Jr. was born in 
Gorman, Texas as the only child of Elza, Sr, and Myrtle Perry. Lt. Col. 
Elza Perry, Jr. demonstrated his aptitude for leadership while a 
student at De Leon High School, where he was the president of the Class 
of 1950, valedictorian, and captain of the football team. After 
graduating from De Leon High School, he went on to earn his Bachelors 
degree from North Texas State College and an MBA from Michigan State 
University.
  Lt. Col. Elza Perry, Jr. distinguished himself as a 22-year Airman, 
obtaining the rank of Lieutenant Colonel and serving in Germany, 
Okinawa, Vietnam, Taiwan, Florida, California, and five years at the 
Pentagon. During his military service in the Air Force, he served 
honorably in various positions, such as weapons director, commander, 
inspector, and instructor. In Vietnam, Lt. Col. Elza Perry, Jr. served 
as a battle commander at an aircraft control center near Danang and 
stayed in the country until January 27, 1973. His honorable leadership 
earned him the Bronze Star, the Meritorious Service Medal, and the Air 
Force Commendation Medal.
  After retiring from the Air Force at Norton Air Force Base, Lt. Col. 
Elza Perry, Jr. decided to remain in Southern California and dedicated 
himself to his work as the Director of Vehicle Services and Assistant 
County Administrator. He later retired in 1991 and lived in Redlands, 
California for many years before settling in Calimesa, California in 
1998. As a retired veteran, Elza spent the remainder of his life with 
his wife Bonnie in a retirement community in Calimesa where he 
continued showing his leadership through acts of service for his 
friends and neighbors. He enjoyed taking exercise classes and was an 
avid fan of the L.A. Dodgers and Angels.
  Lt. Col. Perry, Jr. is survived by his wife of 34 years, Bonnie; two 
stepsons, Captain Robert Perry, USN (Ret.) and Ralph Perry; two 
daughters, Reverend Karin Kaye and Barbara Perry; two stepdaughters, 
Susan Reidel and Jackie Filbeck; and eight grandchildren and six great-
grandchildren.
  I ask my colleagues to join me in honoring and commemorating the 
life, legacy, and service of Lieutenant Colonel Elza Perry, Jr.
today I rise to celebrate the life and legacy 
of Joseph Anthony Fiddler, better known as ``Amp, as we mourn his 
passing.
  Amp Fiddler was born May 16, 1958 in Detroit, Michigan. His family 
instilled in him a deep appreciation for music. He grew up surrounded 
by the sounds of Detroits Motown, rock, jazz, and funk. As a child, 
He found his first 
professional work as a musician with Enchantment, a Detroit-based soul 
act. He was eventually discovered by the legendary George Clinton and 
went on to perform regularly with Parliament-Funkadelic between 1985 
and 1996. It was during this time that Fiddler honed his skills on the 
keyboard and synthesizers, contributing significantly to the bands 
distinctive sound.
  Beyond his work with P-Funk, Fiddler collaborated with notable 
artists such as Prince, Seal, and Maxwell. His studio, Camp Amp, became 
a hub for aspiring musicians. He mentored J Dilla, another notable 
Detroit musician, putting him on the path to developing his signature 
style. Fiddler enjoyed a successful solo career, marked by his blending 
of classic funk with contemporary sound, in addition to his numerous 
collaborations. Despite his stellar career, Fiddler always remained 
humble and dedicated to his craft and community.
  Please join me in recognizing the musical contributions of Amp 
Fiddler, a true guiding force for Detroits musical culture, as we 
mourn his loss.
today, I introduce the Protecting Homes from 
Trains Act of 2024, which would establish a grant program for the 
design and construction of barriers to mitigate rail activity that may 
harm homes and their occupants, including derailments, noise and 
vibrations.
  The Noise Control Act of 1972 created the Office of Noise Abatement 
and Control within the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), granting 
EPA authority and oversight over noise control regulations. However, 
years of defunding left this office without any resources to conduct 
enforcement, forcing EPA to phase out the office in 1982. District of 
Columbia residents frequently tell me about the negative impact of 
train noise and vibrations on their lives. The noise and vibrations can 
harm health and quality of life, and can even harm the structural 
integrity of homes. Congress and the executive branch must do more to 
reduce this harm.
  As a senior member of the Committee on Transportation and 
Infrastructure and as the ranking member of the Subcommittee on 
Highways and Transit, I have been working to reduce transportation 
noise and vibrations. I have convened community meetings with the 
Federal Railroad Administration, the District of Columbia Department of 
Transportation and the Federal Highway Administration to examine how to 
reduce train noise and vibrations.
  I urge my colleagues to support this bill.
I was unavoidably detained for parts of the 
day on September 14, 2023 and October 26, 2023. On September 14th, had 
I been present, I would have voted: Nay on Roll Call No. 391, H.R. 
1435--Preserving Choice in Vehicle Purchases Act, and Yea on Roll Call 
No. 390, H.R. 1435--Motion to Recommit.
  On October 26th, had I been present, I would have voted Nay on the 
following bills: Roll Call No. 558, H.R. 4394--Energy and Water 
Appropriations Final Passage; Roll Call No. 556, H.R. 4394--Rosendale 
of Montana Part B Amendment No. 60; Roll Call No. 555, H.R. 4394--
Rosendale of Montana Part B Amendment No. 59; Roll Call No. 554, H.R. 
4394--Rosendale of Montana Part B Amendment No. 58; Roll Call No. 553, 
H.R. 4394--Pfluger of Texas Part B Amendment No. 57; Roll Call No. 552, 
H.R. 4394--Pfluger of Texas Part B Amendment No. 56; Roll Call No. 551, 
H.R. 4394--Norman of South Carolina Part B Amendment No. 51; Roll Call 
No. 550, H.R. 4394--Norman of South Carolina Part B Amendment No. 50; 
Roll Call No. 549, H.R. 4394--Norman of South Carolina Part B Amendment 
No. 50; Roll Call No. 548, H.R. 4394--Norman of South Carolina Part B 
Amendment No. 47; Roll Call No. 547, H.R. 4394--Luna of Florida Part B 
Amendment No. 43; and Yea on Roll Call No. 557, H.R. 4394--Motion to 
Recommit.
I rise today to recognize the promotion of 
Brigadier General Lisa J. Hou to the rank of Major General. Major 
General Lisa J. Hou has served as the Adjutant General of the New 
Jersey National Guard and Commissioner of the New Jersey Department of 
Military and Veterans Affairs since June 2021. As a daughter of 
immigrants raised in New Jersey, General Hous journey is a prime 
example of the American Dream and of our nations spirit. It is my 
privilege to honor a true patriot that has served and supported New 
Jersey and our country.
  Major General Hou has commanded the more than 8,400 Soldiers and 
Airmen of the New Jersey National Guard with steadfast determination. 
The wide range of missions the New Jersey National Guard responds to 
presents a challenge Major General Hou has risen to accomplish. Whether 
through state-to-state partnership with the Republic of Albania, 
supporting the Global War on Terror, or providing assistance during 
natural disasters, the Soldiers and Airmen of the New Jersey National 
Guard have executed their missions with the utmost professionalism and 
success under Major General Hous command.
  In addition to her role as Adjutant General of the National Guard, 
Major General Hou also serves in the New Jersey Governors cabinet as 
Commissioner of the Department of Military and Veterans Affairs 
(DMAVA), Major General Hou leads, directs, and manages all state 
veterans programs, commissions, and facilities in the Garden State, 
providing services and benefits to over 300,000 veterans statewide. I 
extend my most heartfelt thanks to Major General Hou for her service 
and sacrifice.
I rise today in recognition of the 30th 
anniversary of the Womens Cardiovascular Medicine Program at the 
University of California, Davis, and to acknowledge National Red Dress 
Day, which seeks to raise awareness about heart disease being a leading 
cause of death for women in America.
  Established in 1994, the UC Davis Womens Cardiovascular Medicine 
program and clinic was the nations first program dedicated to womens 
cardiovascular health. Since then, the program has continued to lead 
the industry in cardiovascular care in the Sacramento region, providing 
personalized, equitable, and women-centered care to tackle cardiac 
conditions unique to women. The remarkable clinical team offers a 
comprehensive and preventative range of care options that include, but 
are not limited to, dietary counseling, cardiac rehabilitation, and 
risk factor analysis, diagnosis, and treatment.
  In addition to the programs clinic providing care to women with 
cardiovascular conditions, it also trains the next generation of 
healthcare workers. Students are given the opportunity to directly 
engage with women with heart disease through resident rotations and the 
opportunity to shadow leading experts in womens heart care.
  The UC Davis Womens Cardiovascular program is a great representation 
of how the Sacramento community leads the nation on some of the most 
critical issues of our time. Some of this programs many feats include 
collaborating with the California Department of Public Health to draft 
Californias Master Plan for Stroke Prevention, now designated as a 
model womens heart program by the United States Department of Health 
and Human Services.
, today we honor the Womens Cardiovascular Medicine 
Program at UC Davis Health for 30 years of excellence in womens heart 
care and education.
Title IV of Senate Resolution 4, agreed to by the Senate of February 
4, 1977, calls for establishment of a system for a computerized 
schedule of all meetings and hearings of Senate committees, 
subcommittees, joint committees, and committees of conference. This 
title requires all such committees to notify the Office of the Senate 
Daily Digest--designated by the Rules Committee--of the time, place and 
purpose of the meetings, when scheduled and any cancellations or 
changes in the meetings as they occur.
  As an additional procedure along with the computerization of this 
information, the Office of the Senate Daily Digest will prepare this 
information for printing in the Extensions of Remarks section of the 
Congressional Record on Monday and Wednesday of each week.
  Meetings scheduled for Tuesday, February 6, 2024 may be found in the 
Daily Digest of todays Record.

     9 a.m.
       Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs
         To hold hearings to examine the Financial Stability 
           Oversight Council Annual Report to Congress.
                                                            SD-538
     9:30 a.m.
       Committee on Energy and Natural Resources
         To hold hearings to examine the administrations pause on 
           liquefied natural gas (LNG) export approvals and the 
           Department of Energys process for assessing LNG export 
           applications.
                                                            SD-366
       Committee on Foreign Relations
         To hold hearings to examine the nomination of Dafna 
           Hochman Rand, of Maryland, to be Assistant Secretary of 
           State for Democracy, Human Rights, and Labor.
                                                            SD-419
     10 a.m.
       Committee on Finance
         To hold hearings to examine Artificial Intelligence and 
           Health Care, focusing on promise and pitfalls.
                                                            SD-215
       Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions
         To hold hearings to examine the cost of prescription 
           drugs.
                                                            SD-430
       Committee on the Judiciary
         Business meeting to consider the nominations of Ann Marie 
           McIff Allen, to be United States District Judge for the 
           District of Utah, Susan M. Bazis, to be United States 
           District Judge for the District of Nebraska, Ernest 
           Gonzalez, and Leon Schydlower, both to be a United 
           States District Judge for the Western District of 
           Texas, Kelly Harrison Rankin, to be United States 
           District Judge for the District of Wyoming, and Robin 
           Michelle Meriweather, of Virginia, to be a Judge of the 
           United States Court of Federal Claims; to be 
           immediately followed by a hearing to examine pending 
           nominations.
                                                            SD-226
     10:30 a.m.
       Committee on Indian Affairs
         To hold hearings to examine S. 2385, to provide access to 
           reliable, clean, and drinkable water on Tribal lands, 
           S. 2868, to accept the request to revoke the charter of 
           incorporation of the Lower Sioux Indian Community in 
           the State of Minnesota at the request of that 
           Community, S. 3022, to amend the Indian Health Care 
           Improvement Act to allow Indian Health Service 
           scholarship and loan recipients to fulfill service 
           obligations through half-time clinical practice, S. 
           2796, to provide for the equitable settlement of 
           certain Indian land disputes regarding land in 
           Illinois, and S. 3230, to transfer administrative 
           jurisdiction of certain Federal lands from the Army 
           Corps of Engineers to the Bureau of Indian Affairs, to 
           take such lands into trust for the Winnebago Tribe of 
           Nebraska.
                                                            SD-628

     10 a.m.
       Committee on Environment and Public Works
         To hold hearings to examine the Water Resources 
           Development Act, focusing on USACE water infrastructure 
           projects, programs and priorities.
                                                            SD-406

     9:30 a.m.
       Committee on Armed Services
         To hold hearings to examine global security challenges 
           and U.S. strategy.
                                                            SH-216