today I rise in honor of Jennifer Lynn 
Norton, a proud U.S. Air Force veteran and longtime champion for 
survivors of human trafficking.
  For over 34 years, Jennifer Lynn Norton has dedicated her life to 
serving others through military and civilian service. As a member of 
the U.S. Air Force for the 36th Tactical Fighter Wing, she was an 
invaluable asset during Operation Desert Storm, leading to innovation 
and positive change whilst providing logistics support to her team.
  Joining her active-duty experiences with her passion in counseling, 
Jennifer rose to become the first female veteran to serve as an 
executive assistant for The American Legion National Headquarters. With 
community engagement at the heart of her vision of service, she stays 
active in her community through work with the Indy Hope Center and the 
Veterans Day Council of Indianapolis. The commitment she has 
continuously demonstrated to her fellow veterans, Hoosiers, and 
Americans has left in its wake a legacy of hard work and compassion 
that continuously inspires her community.
  Her efforts across the years have rendered her various accolades, 
such as the Airman Quarter Honors and the Outstanding Leadership Award. 
It is an honor to be able to recognize Jennifer for her exemplary work 
once more today with the Sheila Corcoran Hoosier Women Hero Award. 
Having started with its namesake, Sheila Corcoran, this award was 
fashioned to uplift exemplary Hoosier Veteran women whose service to 
their community and Nation is unparalleled, women who are inspirational 
and guided by a deep love for their fellow Americans.
  Today, I ask my colleagues to join me in honoring Jennifer Lynn 
Nortons legacy, accomplishments, and continued endeavors with the 
Sheila Corcoran Hoosier Women Hero Award for the month of November 
2024.
I rise today to honor the distinguished 
career of Patrick Smith, a dedicated flight paramedic and Registered 
Nurse who has dedicated 40 years to the field of emergency medical 
services (EMS). Pats contributions have left a profound impact on both 
the individuals he has served and the EMS profession here in northeast 
Indiana.
  Throughout his career, Patrick was a trailblazer in the early 
education of appropriate airway management technique. Drawing on his 
years of experience as a Respiratory Therapist, he emphasized the 
importance of proper ventilatory and oxygenation steps long before they 
became widely recognized and implemented as they are today.
  Pat dedicated 32 years to the Bippus Fire Department. During this 
time, he served as a Primary Instructor, teaching First Responder and 
EMT classes across Huntington County. He also worked as a street 
paramedic and shift supervisor with Huntington County EMS, where his 
leadership and skill led to his appointment as Director.
  Pats career then took him to Lutheran, where he excelled as a 
Critical Care Paramedic before transitioning into the Flight Program a 
few years later. After becoming a Registered Nurse (RN), he has 
continued to maintain his Paramedic, RN, and Respiratory Therapist 
licenses. Among Pats many accolades, he holds the record of completing 
over 1,270 flights with Lutheran Air.
  Beyond these professional achievements, Pat has been a mentor to 
consecutive generations of healthcare workers. His deep knowledge, 
wealth of experience, and positive demeanor have aided countless others 
through the challenges and demands associated with emergency care.
  Pats peers, students, and the thousands of patients he has served 
hold him in the highest esteem, and his absence will be felt. 
Healthcare professionals like Patrick are vital to our community. I 
want to express my gratitude for his decades of service to our region 
and wish him continued success in this next great chapter of life.
I rise in celebration of Scruggs Volunteer 
Fire and Rescue Department (VFD) Captain Jane Crawford. Captain 
Crawford has dedicated more than 50 years of service to one of the most 
active lifesaving crews in Franklin County and surrounding communities.
  Jane Crawford is 85 years old and still serves as an active member of 
Scruggs Volunteer Fire and Rescue Department. She has made it clear 
that she has no plans of stepping down anytime soon from her role as 
Captain--a further testament to her dedication to this team.
  Captain Crawford and her husband, V.T. ``Slim Crawford, helped 
found the Scruggs VFD in 1974. Slim served as chief of the department 
for 41 years until stepping down in 2014. Slim unfortunately passed 
away in 2019 at the age of 77, and to this day is still recognized as a 
hero to the community.
  Over the Scruggs VFDs many years in service, the department and its 
leadership have accomplished countless notable milestones--including 
the creation of a Rescue Division in 1981, the addition of a Dive 
Division in 1987, and the purchasing of a large assortment of modern 
vehicles and equipment, like the 2018 ladder truck and pumper. These 
additions have helped shape the Scruggs VFD into the successful 
department it is today, and Captain Jane Crawford has played a big part 
since the very start.
  During the early years of service, the Department averaged around 20 
calls for service per year. Since then, the number of calls has grown 
to average 400 calls each year, and yet the crew is still able to get 
each job done.
  It is amazing to see the dedication of each crew member in the 
Department under the leadership of Captain Crawford. She has estimated 
that she has trained thousands of firefighters over her many years of 
service as a classroom instructor in the community. The Department 
truly would not be what it is today without her guidance and 
leadership.
  To add to her resume, as a female firefighter, Captain Crawford has 
been a champion in a career field dominated by men. According to the 
U.S. Fire Department Profile, female firefighters amount to just 9 
percent of firefighters in the country. To accomplish what Captain 
Crawford has is a feat in itself; adding that she has been one of the 
leaders of this department in a predominantly male field makes it all 
the more impressive.
  Captain Crawford has made it known that her number one priority is 
the safety of Department members, as she has always led with that 
notion when assessing a scene. Her devotion to the safety of her squad 
shows that not just professionally, but on a human level, she is 
someone to be admired.
  It is people like Captain Jane Crawford who elevate communities from 
being good to great. I am honored to have such a strong team as the 
Scruggs Volunteer Fire and Rescue Department serve the 9th District of 
Virginia, and even more honored to have witnessed Captain Crawford 
doing her work over the years. She is someone to admire, someone to 
honor, and someone to look up to, and I want to sincerely thank her for 
her service.
I rise today to honor the legacy of Robert 
William ``Bill Tracy. Born on October 16, 1942, to Tilton and Kathryn 
Tracy. Bill lived a full and vibrant life, deeply rooted in the land 
and community that shaped him.
  Raised on the family ranch, Bill graduated from Wasco High School in 
1960 and pursued higher education at Cal Poly San Luis Obispo, where 
his passion for agriculture began to take shape. In 1968, he was 
activated into the United States Army Reserve, later returning to the 
family ranch, where he continued his work as a fourth-generation 
farmer. Tracy Ranch, a multi-generational farming and cattle operation 
established in 1862, was a central part of Bills life, and he 
dedicated much of his career to strengthening the agricultural 
community.
  Bill was an active and respected member of the farming industry, 
serving on numerous boards and participating in leadership programs 
such as the California Ag Leadership Program and the National Cotton 
Council ``Cotton Leadership Program sponsored by DuPont. These 
experiences helped shape his expertise in agriculture policy.
  In 1987, Bill was appointed Undersecretary of the California 
Department of Food and Agriculture under Governor George Deukmejian. 
Known for his trademark cowboy boots and hat, Bill worked tirelessly as 
an advocate for Californias farming community. His tenure in state 
government gave him a unique perspective on policy, and he became a 
trusted voice in agricultural circles.
  Outside of his career, Bill was a passionate historian with a special 
interest in the Civil War and both World Wars. He formed lifelong 
friendships with fellow history enthusiasts Jack Bell and John Gibson, 
who became a cherished part of his journey.
  Bills personal life was equally fulfilling. He and his wife, Susie, 
shared 50 years of marriage. Together, they explored all seven 
continents, often accompanied by friends Dale and Carol, and most 
recently by John and Donna.
  As a grandfather, Bill found immense joy in his grandchildrens 
lives. He could always be found at their sports games, dance recitals, 
and piano performances, providing support and encouragement at every 
turn. His love for his grandchildren was evident, and he shared 
countless memories with them.
  Bill is survived by his wife, Susie; children, Mark Tracy (Allison), 
Todd Tracy (Annette), Rob Tracy (Kathy), and Stephanie OCallaghan 
(Kevin); and eight grandchildren: Haylee, Kathryn, Grace, Trent, 
Maggie, Izzy, Clarisse, and Lilly. He is also survived by his brothers, 
John Tracy (Donna) and David Tracy (Jerry), as well as numerous nieces, 
nephews, and extended family.
  Mr Speaker, I invite my esteemed colleagues to join me in honoring 
the legacy of Robert William ``Bill Tracy. Bill lived with purpose 
and passion, leaving a legacy that will continue to inspire his family, 
community, and the agricultural world for generations to come.
I rise today to honor a 
distinguished leader in higher education, President Kirk H. Schulz of 
Washington State University in Pullman, Washington, who will retire in 
June of 2025. President Schulz has dedicated his career to fostering 
academic excellence, advancing research, and building a campus 
environment that welcomes all students to succeed. Today, we recognize 
and celebrate his legacy and contributions to both the university and 
the broader community.
  President Schulzs tenure at Washington State University is marked by 
extraordinary achievements. Under his leadership, Washington State 
University saw record-setting gains in philanthropy, notably raising 
$167.9 million in private gifts in fiscal year 2023. Washington State 
University received full accreditation for the Elson S. Floyd College 
of Medicine in 2021 and launched Eastern Washingtons first pediatric 
residency program in 2023.
  Throughout his tenure, Washington State University also expanded 
educational and research facilities across the WSU system, including 
the U.S. Department of Agricultures new Plant Sciences Building, 
Schweitzer Engineering Hall, and a major health sciences remodel on the 
Spokane campus. He has been instrumental in overseeing the growth of 
WSU scholarships and research expenditures, enhancing the 
infrastructure supporting student

safety, improving the delivery of health care programs across the 
state, and rebuilding the renowned Pac-12 athletics conference.
  Beyond these accomplishments, President Schulz has earned a 
reputation as a compassionate and dedicated leader, always prioritizing 
the well-being and success of students. He has consistently championed 
initiatives aimed at increasing access to education for all, making a 
lasting impact on countless lives. President Schulzs commitment to 
service extends far beyond the campus, as he has actively engaged with 
the community through partnerships, outreach programs, my office, and 
other efforts to uplift and support Washington State University.
  As President Schulz embarks on his well-deserved retirement, we 
extend our deepest gratitude for his many years of service and 
dedication. His leadership has left an incredible mark on Washington 
State University, and his legacy will be felt for generations to come. 
We wish President Schulz all the best in his future endeavors and thank 
him for his outstanding contributions to Washington State University 
and higher education.
, I ask that the members of this House join the in 
honoring President Schulz for his remarkable career and recognizing the 
lasting impact of his service to Washington State University, the state 
of Washington, and our Nation.
I rise today to mourn the loss of my friend 
and a community hero, John Enriquez. Johns life and decades of service 
stand as a proud example of the immense influence an individual can 
have on an entire community.
  Born the eldest of seven, John grew up in Bakersfield and attended 
East Bakersfield High School, where he found joy playing baseball for 
the Blades. Though one could easily tell from the cap he so often wore, 
John loved baseball and was a lifelong Tampa Bay Devil Rays fan. For 
years growing up, John worked at two family businesses--his 
grandmothers Mexican restaurant, Jiminez Cafe, and Enriquez 
Construction. Eventually John found his primary occupation with the 
City of Santa Clarita as a public works supervisor. For 21 years, he 
would commute over 100 miles each day for this job, but he would never 
leave Bakersfield.
  In the early 2000s, John conceived ambitious plans to preserve the 
charm of Bakersfield, then striving to maintain its natural and manmade 
beauty. In 2001, John was a founding member of Keep Bakersfield 
Beautiful (KBB), a local affiliate of the Keep America Beautiful 
program.. During his leadership of KBB, he was known for his strong 
steady leadership, always conducting himself with kindness and respect 
toward others.
  John will certainly be remembered for finding common ground between 
differing opinions in a friendly manner. In the days surrounding his 
death, Johns colleagues remembered how he patiently developed 
collaboration between Keep Bakersfield Beautiful, Caltrans, and the 
City of Bakersfield to clean Bakersfields highways in 2010. Initially 
a tense standoff over a lack of funding, Johns gracious persistence 
led the group to a solution, which saw homeless workers from local 
shelters carry out the beautification work. It was this patient faith 
in the goodness of others that inspired his colleagues and community to 
unite to the common cause of preserving the beauty of their home.
  A humble man, Johns servant leadership was hard to miss, and 
recognized by his peers through several awards. In 2004, John received 
the Presidents Call to Service Award and the Keep America Beautiful 
Iron Eyes Cody Award for his success in raising community awareness and 
community involvement for KBBs beautification projects.
  In October 2024, John received the key to the City of Bakersfield 
from Mayor Goh for his enduring legacy of service to our community. 
Given his service, many important buildings and vicinities like the Fox 
Theater or the Mechanics Bank Arena owe their restorations and current 
charm to Johns leadership. It is difficult to imagine what 
Bakersfields community service efforts would look like in the future 
without John Enriquez.
  John is survived by his wife, Carola, and daughter, Lauren Enriquez, 
who both spoke of the unconditional love and support he always gave 
them.
, I urge my colleagues to join me in offering our 
heartfelt condolences to Johns family and the community that loved 
him. Whether friend or family, John was a true gift to our community.
I am not recorded for Roll Call 
No. 475 and Roll Call No. 476 on Wednesday, November 20, 2024. I was 
unable to be present for votes. Had I been present, I would have voted 
YEA on Roll Call No. 475; and YEA on Roll Call No. 476.
I rise today to recognize my Chief of 
Staff, Emma Youngquist, for her work on behalf of every constituent in 
Minnesotas Third Congressional District. At the end of my term, Emma 
will officially depart this office to serve as the Chief of Staff at 
Second Harvest Heartland and I could not be more proud or grateful for 
her service.
  Emma was born and raised in Minnesotas Third Congressional District. 
She graduated from St. Olaf College in Northfield, Minnesota with a 
Bachelor of Arts in Political Science. She has years of government and 
political experience, including operational, outreach, and casework 
roles within Senator Amy Klobuchars office. She joined my office in 
January of 2019 as Director of Constituent Advocacy before serving as 
District Director and later Chief of Staff.
  Emma has been a capable and supportive leader during a time when 
relentless curveballs were pitched at our Nation, our state, and our 
team. Emmas quiet, contemplative decision making keeps us grounded and 
on track. Emma is a comprehensive and creative problem solver. She is 
the embodiment of cooler heads prevailing.
  Emma makes our entire staff feel seen and supported. She knows when 
to push and when to nurture, and every member of our team has grown as 
people and professionals under her steady leadership. Emma has stepped 
up and filled big shoes on our team, building on the successes and 
styles of leaders who came before her while making each role uniquely 
her own. Listening is Emmas superpower. Her ability to work with 
distinctly different personalities and perspectives, whether among her 
colleagues or her constituents, is second to none. Emma is a leader who 
genuinely cares about her team. She is someone you want in your corner, 
she is fiercely smart, caring, and always shows up for her team no 
matter the circumstance.
  The people of Minnesotas Third Congressional District were lucky to 
have her dedication and leadership, and she will be dearly missed. 
However, Im extraordinarily happy that she will continue to serve the 
Nation and the people of Minnesota in her new capacity at Second 
Harvest Heartland. I wish Emma all the best in her future endeavors and 
thank her for six years of faithful service to this Nation in this 
office--and many more to come.
I rise today to honor the life of Robert 
William ``Bill Tracy, a fourth-generation farmer from Buttonwillow, 
California. Bill passed away on November 7, 2024, at the age of 82. His 
loss is felt deeply not only by his family and friends but also by the 
agricultural community he served.
  Born on October 16, 1942, Bill grew up on his familys ranch, 
attending the two-room Wildwood Grammar School and later Wasco High 
School, where he graduated in 1960. He pursued higher education at 
California Polytechnic State University, San Luis Obispo before 
dedicating his life to farming and public service.
  In the 1960s, Bill was activated in the U.S. Army Reserves, serving 
his country and fostering a lifelong interest in American military 
history. His passion extended to the study of the U.S. Civil War and 
both World Wars, and he built an impressive collection of military 
artifacts. Bills love of history complemented his deep respect for 
service and dedication, qualities he carried throughout his life.
  Bill returned to the family ranch, where his tireless work ethic and 
advocacy for the agricultuial community soon earned him great respect. 
In recognition of this expertise and leadership in agriculture, he was 
appointed Undersecretary of the California Department of Food and 
Agriculture in 1987. In this role, he championed the needs of 
California farmers, earning the admiration of colleagues who remember 
him as a kind and loyal leader who put passion into everything he did.
  Beyond his professional achievements, Bill was a devoted husband to 
Susie, a loving father to their four children--Mark, Todd, Rob, and 
Stephanie--and a caring grandfather to eight grandchildren. His family 
will fondly remember his playful, friendly nature, and his unyielding 
dedication to his work.
  Bill and Susie shared a love of travel, visiting all seven continents 
and creating special traditions, such as taking each grandchild on an 
ocean cruise for their 10th birthday. At home, Bill was a fixture in 
Buttonwillow, known for his cowboy hat and boots, his daily breakfasts 
at Willow Ranch, and his quiet pride in watching Susie line dance 
during their frequent dinners out.
  Bills passing leaves a void in the Buttonwillow community. Tributes 
from friends and colleagues reflect his commitment to agriculture, his 
enduring friendships, and the warm and inspiring impression he left on 
those who knew him.
  Mr Speaker, today, we celebrate the life of Robert William ``Bill 
Tracy, a man whose legacy will continue to inspire generations of 
Californians. Amanda and I offer our deepest sympathies to the Tracy 
family, who proudly carry on Bills legacy. I know the Central Valley 
will continue to honor his lasting contributions to our community.