I rise today to commemorate National Space 
Day, a moment to honor the extraordinary contributions of the aerospace 
community to our Nation and the world. Designating May 2, 2025, as 
National Space Day gives us the opportunity to reflect on the 
achievements of the past, recognize the advancements of today, and 
inspire the possibilities of tomorrow.
  Our Nation has long led the way in space exploration. From the Apollo 
missions that landed the first humans on the Moon to todays Artemis 
program, which will take us back to the Moon and beyond, the United 
States has shown whats possible when bold ideas meet determination. 
These milestones remind us of the pioneering spirit that defines 
America.
  Today, we see that same spirit driving innovation in every corner of 
the space sector. NASAs groundbreaking missions, the Space Forces 
contributions to national security, and the work of private companies 
and universities are redefining what we can achieve in space. In 
Nebraskas 2nd Congressional District, were witnessing history made 
through initiatives like the Big Red Satellite team, where students 
from the University of Nebraska-Lincolns Aerospace eXperimental 
Payload team, along with middle and high school students from Lincoln, 
Omaha, and Aurora, built the states first CubeSat satellite. This 
satellite, launched in 2024 on NASAs 30th commercial resupply mission 
to the International Space Station, represents the unlimited promise of 
our next generation.
  Space exploration doesnt just inspire; it delivers real benefits to 
our daily lives. Our Nations farmers utilize technologies like GPS, 
weather satellites, and internet connectivity, which has allowed our 
producers to increase efficiency and productivity in their operations. 
NASAs impact on Nebraska is significant, supporting 33 jobs and 
generating $7.4 million in economic output, along with $238,000 in 
state tax revenue. For every million dollars of economic output 
generated by NASA civil service employees, an additional $6.6 million 
is sustained throughout our state economy.
  Nebraskas contributions to space exploration are significant and 
growing. Four Nebraska suppliers have contributed to NASAs Artemis 
program, including manufacturing supplies for Exploration Ground 
Systems at NASAs Kennedy Space Center. Were also proud of our states 
space heritage through Clayton C. Anderson, Nebraskas first and only 
astronaut, who spent 152 days aboard the International Space Station 
and conducted three spacewalks totaling over 18 hours.
  Perhaps most importantly, National Space Day reminds us to invest in 
the next generation. By investing in STEM education, we ensure that 
young people across Nebraska and the Nation have the tools they need to 
dream big and take on the challenges of tomorrow. Programs like the 
NASA Nebraska Space Grant Consortium at the University of Nebraska 
Omaha and our states partnerships

with the International Space Station are lighting the way for future 
scientists, engineers, and astronauts.
  As we celebrate National Space Day, we must also remain vigilant in 
protecting NASAs crucial programs and funding. Any significant cuts to 
NASAs science funding would not only impact our space economy and 
workforce but could threaten our national security and technological 
leadership position. We must maintain Americas preeminence in space.
  I encourage all Americans to reflect on how space exploration shapes 
our lives and futures. Im proud of our districts contributions to 
this great endeavor, and I look forward to seeing what we can achieve 
together in the years ahead.
HONORING ABE FRIEDMAN FOR HIS SERVICE TO THE PEOPLE OF WASHINGTONS 
                             FIRST DISTRICT
I rise today to recognize and honor Abe 
Friedman for his exemplary service to the people of Washingtons First 
Congressional District. For more than four years, Abe has been an 
indispensable member of my team, helping ensure that our legislative 
work always stayed closely aligned with the priorities and values of 
our constituents.
  As someone who grew up on Capitol Hill in Seattle, Abe has brought to 
our office a deep

understanding of the Pacific Northwest region and a steadfast 
commitment to delivering results for families, workers, and businesses 
across the district. His work on trade, foreign policy, and health care 
demonstrated a valuable combination of policy expertise, strategic 
insight, and tireless dedication.
  Abes contributions have made a real difference in peoples lives. He 
helped lead efforts to stand up against harmful tariffs and supported 
the introduction of the Prevent Tariff Abuse Act, which aims to protect 
Washingtons economy and jobs. Abe also showed deep commitment to 
fixing our health care system, playing a major role in advancing 
legislation to reform prior authorization to allow patients to get the 
care they need without facing hurdles. He also supported the 
construction of new military housing at Naval Station Everett to ensure 
our servicemembers and their families had a safe place to call home. 
Amid the baby formula shortage in 2022, Abe fought hard to remove 
tariffs on imported formula to ensure families had safe, affordable 
access to the nutrition infants need. Abe fought hard to secure 
disaster relief for dairy farmers and growers who were hit the hardest 
during the 2021 heat dome.
  Through every challenge, Abe brought a calm presence, a sharp policy 
mind, and quick wit. This work often happened behind the scenes, but 
its impact will be felt across Washingtons First District for years to 
come. Mr. Speaker, I ask my colleagues to join me in honoring Abe 
Friedman and wishing him the best in his next chapter.
Bob Wesley was born in Marietta, Georgia, in 
1953 to Martha ``Pete Wesley and Frank Wesley. Bob was the middle son 
among six siblings and was always different and quick-witted.
  As a child who stood head and shoulders above other kindergartners, 
he immediately befriended the shortest kid in class. He convinced his 
brothers to play pranks on their mother, once taping over the speaker 
inside her phone, prompting a repairman visit and an eye roll from her. 
But while someone who didnt know him saw a goofy, funny jokester, he 
also showed an adult-like interest in government and protecting the 
rights of others.
  He was stubborn. Rather than following the rules and cutting his long 
hair, Bob dropped out of Lakeland High School and enrolled in night 
school instead. He became a photographer and, for a short time, a 
traveling mechanic with a drag race funny car team, the Houston 
Hustler.
  He then attended Polk County Community College and received his 
bachelors in history at the University of West Florida. Bob found his 
passion when he pursued his interest in the law, freedom, and justice 
at Florida State University College of Law. He was then admitted to the 
Florida Bar and became a board-certified trial attorney. He eventually 
settled down in Orlando.
  After decades as a successful defense attorney, Bob was elected as a 
Democrat for the Office of the Public Defender of Orange and Osceola 
counties in 2001. He was elected by the people and served in this role 
for 24 years, retiring in January of 2025. During his tenure as a 
public defender, Bob partnered with the community to help make justice 
equitable for all, regardless of race, status, or socioeconomic status. 
This was his legacy.
  He gained national attention for his work to ensure professional 
clothing for his clients, those accused of crimes, those facing 
involuntary commitment for mental health and addiction, and children 
who appeared in delinquency cases. Bob hosted an annual clothing drive 
where he would greet people with smiles and jokes as they dropped off 
their clothes to be worn in court by his clients. He also created a 
community bail fund to help those without resources pay bail and be 
released from jail while awaiting trial.
  Bob was an outspoken advocate against police profiling and harsher 
sentences for Black and brown people. He lobbied aggressively to reduce 
time behind bars for low-level, first-time offenders, fought for civil 
citations over arrests, and brought attention to issues with evidence 
handling and arrests of children in his circuit.
I rise today to honor the 
upcoming 100th anniversary of a beloved institution, the Harlem 
Globetrotters. Their centennial will be in 2026 and will mark 100 years 
of entertaining and inspiring audiences around the world.
  The Harlem Globetrotters were founded in Chicago, Illinois in 1926 by 
Abe Saperstein at Wendell Phillips High School. They began as the 
``Savoy Big Five and have since become a global phenomenon, known for 
their amazing athletic skills, their comedic routines and the goodwill 
they spread. Their unique blend of athleticism and showmanship has 
captivated fans of all ages, and their impact extends far beyond the 
basketball court.
  The Globetrotters have a deep and meaningful connection to the 1st 
Congressional District of Illinois. On May 6, 2025, a street will be 
named after the Globetrotters near Phillips High School in the 1st 
District. Their roots in Chicagos vibrant Bronzeville community have 
created a legacy that resonates within our community.
  As we approach this milestone, it is fitting that we recognize the 
Globetrotters contributions to the world of sports and entertainment. 
They have brought joy to millions, transcended cultural barriers and 
served as ambassadors of goodwill for the United States.
  Among the many talented players who have donned the Globetrotters 
uniform, some have become legends. These include Lynette Woodard, a 
trailblazing Olympian and the first woman to play for a mens 
professional basketball team; Wilt Chamberlain, a basketball icon known 
for his dominant presence: Meadowlark Lemon, an unforgettable showman 
and one of the most beloved Globetrotters of all time; Marques Haynes, 
a legendary dribbler whose skills were unmatched; Reece ``Goose 
Tatum, known as the Clown Prince of basketball; and Curly Neal, famous 
for his incredible dribbling skills. These players, among many others, 
have contributed to the Globetrotters rich history and enduring 
legacy.
, I ask that my colleagues join me in honoring the 100th 
anniversary of the Harlem Globetrotters.
I include in the Record 
remarks submitted at the request of a Virginia Beach constituent, Rabbi 
Dr. Israel Zoberman of Temple Lev Tikvah, and are a reflection of his 
views:
       Israel At 77--How poignant to affirm the special 
     relationship between the U.S. and Israel, two close 
     democratic allies, in our own Hampton Roads and Commonwealth 
     of Virginia! Hampton Roads military might is ever ready to 
     stand by beleaguered Israel. Early in the Gaza War, the USS 
     Abraham Lincoln aircraft carrier, where I had lectured on 
     Holocaust Lessons, rushed to the Mediterranean to deter 
     Israels Iran led enemies. Currently the USS Harry Truman 
     aircraft carrier is there hitting Yemens Houthis who hit 
     Israel. Uniquely, The Virginia Israel Advisory Board (VIAB) 
     established in 1996, a Virginia government agency, advises 
     the Governor on promoting economic, cultural and educational 
     ties with Israel. Israels 77th anniversary takes place in 
     the long and dark shadow of the transforming events of 
     October 7, 2023, continuing to impact the survival and 
     meaning of the Jewish state from within and without. All 
     those seeking searing reflection should turn to an essential 
     book of blood, pain and love. Amir Tibon gifted Israeli 
     author and noted journalists recent The Gates of Gaza (A 
     Story of Betrayal, Survival, and Hope In Israels 
     Borderlands), Little, Brown and Company. 2024 is bound to be 
     a classic.
       This literary masterpiece offers eye-witness report from 
     that ``Black Sabbath with its shocking Holocaust images, 
     continuing to shake up the State of Israel, the Middle East 
     and beyond. Tibon, his wife and two very young daughters 
     survived a harrowing nightmare in their homes safe room in 
     Kibbutz Nahal Oz, the closest Israeli community to Gaza. On 
     that day, that will also live in infamy, they were terrorized 
     in darkness and very small quarters till liberated by Amirs 
     father, Noam, a retired Israeli general, who rushed with his 
     wife from Tel Aviv to save their family. Both Amir and Noam 
     were invited to share with then President Biden when he 
     arrived in Israel on October 17. Both father and son firmly 
     requested the release of barbarically treated 251 hostages, 
     including American citizens. Captives redemption is a top 
     Jewish commandment and an honored Israeli tradition. Saving 
     the remaining hostages is paramount! The authors angst is 
     with the Nazi-like Hamas leaders as well as Prime Minister 
     Netanyahu and his government for the colossal failure to 
     forestall the October 7 debacle, requiring a state inquiry 
     commission. A disturbing inclusion is the eulogy by the late 
     Moshe Dayan, the iconic Israeli leader who back in April 30, 
     1956, spoke at Nahal Ozs first funeral. Dayan, initially 
     arriving the day before for planned four weddings only to 
     face the brutal murder of Roi Rutberg, Nahal Ozs security 
     chief, by infiltrating Gazans. Dayans stirring words created 
     a stir in the young community for its pessimistic message 
     relevant years later for the October 7 much larger calamity, 
     raising troubling questions about a peaceful future. ``Have 
     we forgotten that this group of young people dwelling at 
     Nahal Oz is bearing the heavy gates of Gaza on its shoulders? 
     Beyond the furrow of the border, a sea of hatred and desire 
     for revenge is swelling awaiting the day when serenity will 
     dull our path . . . This is our lifes choice: to be prepared 
     and armed, strong and determined, lest the sword be stricken 
     from our fist and our lives cut down
       Yet, unsettling as the current scenario is we are duty-
     bound at this significant 77th celebration of an Israel 
     reborn representing 4,000 years of Jewish experience and 
     persistence, to keep a balanced perspective. Israels 
     monumental accomplishments and gained substantial power--
     though still vulnerable--since its fragile 1948 establishment 
     in the Holocausts consuming shadow are promising. However, 
     its internal conflicting core issues demand resolution and 
     reconciliation to guarantee a robust democracy in a 
     pluralistic Jewish context, eschewing both secular 
     authoritarianism and oppressive theocracy. Otherwise, the 
     gates of Gaza (the books title) that biblical Samson carried 
     facing the threatening Philistines, would now prove too heavy 
     for heroic Israel at multi front war!
  Rabbi Dr. Israel Zoberman is founder of Temple Lev Tikvah in Virginia 
Beach. He was born in Chu, Kazakhstan (USSR) to Polish Holocaust 
survivors who had met in Siberia. He spent his early childhood in 
Poland, Austria and Germany before moving to Israel in 1949.
RECOGNIZING COAST GUARD AUXILIARY CLEARWATER FLOTILLA 11-1S 75TH 
                               of florida
I rise today to recognize Coast Guard 
Auxiliary Clearwater

Flotilla 11-1s 75th Anniversary. The U.S. Coast Guard Auxiliary was 
established by Congress to support the Coast Guard with its boat safety 
mission. Clearwater Flotilla 11-1s service to the Clearwater area 
predates the Coast Guards presence in the city. Today, though, the 
auxiliary provides direct and continuing support to Coast Guard Air 
Station Clearwater and to Coast Guard Station Sand Key. This June, the 
Clearwater Chapter, Flotilla 11-1, celebrates its 75th anniversary of 
service to the boating public throughout the Tampa Bay area. The Coast 
Guard Auxiliary and Flotilla 11-1 provide invaluable support to the 
active-duty Coast Guard through a variety of non-law enforcement 
programs. These include search and rescue missions, marine 
environmental patrols, youth programs, public education and safety 
patrols. Additionally, their missions include search and rescue ``call 
outs, back up marine radio coverage and near short patrols as part of 
the Americas Waterway Watch Program. As the Coast Guards homeland and 
national security responsibilities continue to expand, the men and 
women of the auxiliary have stepped up to increase their port security 
patrols to provide for the defense of our Nations and in our case 
Floridas coastline and waterways.
  Last year, the Flotilla 11-1 volunteered more than 9,100 hours in 
support of the Coast Guard. The group conducted ten boating safety 
education classes with more than 200 graduates, including over 100 
children ranging from kindergarten to fifth grade. The group also 
performed almost 150 Vessel Safety Checks to ensure recreational 
boaters have all the safety gear they need to be legal and safe and 
conducted more than 175 Recreational Boating Safety Program Visits to 
boat equipment stores, marinas, and harborages to improve public 
safety. Flotilla 11-1 Clearwater operates under the leadership of Karen 
Miller, Commander, and Betsy Scott, Vice-Commander. The Flotilla 11-1s 
officers include: Jeff Otto--Communication Services, Debbie Mallorie--
Finance, Steve Bushnell-Fowler--Human Resources, Karen Miller--
Information Services, Public Affairs, and Public Education, Joe 
Garisto--Materials, Mavrick Putnam--Marine Safety and Environmental 
Protection, Lisa Repetto--Publications and Recreational Boating Safety 
Program Visitations, Gerard Gaudry--Navigation Systems, Tim Dolan--
Operations and Rescue and Survival Systems, Mark Kolupa--Secretary/
Records, and Andre Skoinezny--Vessel Examinations. It is my hope that 
my colleagues will join me in thanking the men and women of Clearwater 
Coast Guard Auxiliary Flotilla 11-1 for their 75 years of service to 
our community and for a job well done.
I rise today to recognize the outstanding 
contributions that Ellen Tantillo has made through her work with 
Metropolitan Ministries. Ellen has been a dedicated volunteer at 
Metropolitan Ministries since 2016. Monday and Friday mornings at the 
Metro Welcome Center are lively and welcoming, thanks to this 
remarkable woman. She greets both new and returning volunteers with 
enthusiasm, ensuring newcomers feel comfortable and understand the 
importance of their roles. Her humor, empathy, and dedication ensure 
smooth operations across all areas, from kitchen prep to client 
shopping in the metro market. She welcomes everyone--volunteers, 
clients, residents, and community members--with warmth, compassion, and 
genuine joy in service. Ellen is always ready to tackle any task that 
needs attention. Metropolitan Ministries relies heavily on her to keep 
Volunteer Services running smoothly, not just during the holidays but 
all year round. She embodies the four key values of Metros culture, 
including: Character, Chemistry, Competency, and Calling.
  It is clear Ellen Tantillo has made a profoundly positive impact on 
our community, and I am grateful for her service. May we all strive to 
serve our communities with the same dedication and humility.
I rise today to recognize the outstanding 
contributions that Emily Mazzaro has made to our community through her 
volunteer service at Double Branch Elementary School. Emily is the PTA 
President at Double Branch Elementary School. There is no job too big 
or too small for her to take on. She can be seen most days on campus 
before the bell rings, whether volunteering in the media center 
assisting students, collaborating with staff members about the needs 
that they have and how she can assist them, or orchestrating amazing 
events for within the school community. This year alone, Emily has 
spearheaded large events such as our Rancher Roundup (school carnival) 
with a multitude of vendors from the community, and a variety of small 
and large fundraisers such as Build a Buddy that created revenue for 
technology needs, recess carts for all grade levels, and a backdrop 
with the school logo for special events with students. Under her 
leadership, the PTA also supports classroom needs with teacher grants, 
where teachers can individually or as a team request funds. She also 
supported the schools new PBIS House system with custom flags and t-
shirts for all staff members, handmade by her. Just last year, the PTA 
donated over $10,000 to the media center to refresh its library with 
new books. These are just a few of the examples of the programs and 
initiatives that Emily leads. We are so blessed that if we voice a 
need, Emily responds quickly to fill it. In addition to being so 
hardworking, Emily is just a pleasure to work with. She always has a 
smile on her face and is ready with a quick joke to make those around 
her laugh. The entire staff adores her and is so appreciative of her 
efforts in making Double Branch a wonderful place for students to learn 
and grow. Emily is an integral part of the Double Branch school climate 
and culture.
  It is clear Emily Mazzaro has made a profoundly positive impact on 
our community, and I am grateful for her service. May we all strive to 
serve our communities with the same dedication and humility.
I rise today to recognize the outstanding 
contributions that Mr. Harry White has made to our community in the 
aftermath of Hurricane Milton. In addition to providing countless hours 
of direct support to neighbors and flood victims, he helped coordinate 
the collection and distribution of emergency supplies, meals and 
donated services to help those who needed help. A truly selfless 
leader, Mr. White was a strong advocate for bringing in government and 
non-profit resources to aid in the recovery process.
  It is clear Mr. Harry White has made a profoundly positive impact on 
our community, and I am grateful for his service. May we all strive to 
serve our communities with the same dedication and humility.
I rise today to recognize the outstanding 
contributions that Ms. Jennifer Mankotya has made to our community in 
the aftermath of Hurricane Milton. In addition to providing countless 
hours of direct support to neighbors and flood victims, she helped 
coordinate the collection and distribution of emergency supplies, meals 
and donated services to help those who needed help. A truly selfless 
leader, Ms. Mankotya was a strong advocate for bringing in government 
and non-profit resources to aid in the recovery process.
  It is clear that Jennifer Mankotya has made a profoundly positive 
impact on our community, and I am grateful for her service. May we all 
strive to serve our communities with the same dedication and humility.
I rise today to recognize the West Amwell 
Volunteer Fire Department as they celebrate 75 years of service to our 
community. Since its founding in 1949, the department has provided 
essential fire protection and rescue services to the residents of West 
Amwell Township. Their commitment to answering the call in times of 
need, often under dangerous and demanding conditions, is a testament to 
the sense of courage, duty, and selflessness embodying the very best of 
New Jerseys first responders. As June 14th approaches, the community 
comes together to reflect on this special milestone and honor the 
dedication of the men and women who have spent decades working to keep 
West Amwell safe.
  As the West Amwell Volunteer Fire Department celebrates 75 years of 
distinguished service, I look forward to seeing their continued growth 
and commitment to public safety for years to come.
Title IV of Senate Resolution 4, agreed to by the Senate of February 
4, 1977, calls for establishment of a system for a computerized 
schedule of all meetings and hearings of Senate committees, 
subcommittees, joint committees, and committees of conference. This 
title requires all such committees to notify the Office of the Senate 
Daily Digest--designated by the Rules Committee--of the time, place and 
purpose of the meetings, when scheduled and any cancellations or 
changes in the meetings as they occur.
  As an additional procedure along with the computerization of this 
information, the Office of the Senate Daily Digest will prepare this 
information for printing in the Extensions of Remarks section of the 
Congressional Record on Monday and Wednesday of each week.
  Meetings scheduled for Tuesday, May 6, 2025 may be found in the Daily 
Digest of todays Record.

                                 MAY 8
     9 a.m.
       Committee on Appropriations
       Subcommittee on Commerce, Justice, Science, and Related 
           Agencies
         To hold hearings to examine proposed budget estimates for 
           fiscal year 2026 for the Federal Bureau of 
           Investigation.
                                                            SD-138
     9:30 a.m.
       Committee on Armed Services
         To hold hearings to examine the nominations of Michael 
           Obadal, of Virginia, to be Under Secretary of the Army, 
           and Sean OKeefe, of Virginia, to be a Deputy Under 
           Secretary, both of the Department of Defense.
                                                            SD-G50
       Committee on Energy and Natural Resources
         Business meeting to consider the nominations of Andrea 
           Travnicek, of North Dakota, and Leslie Beyer, of Texas, 
           both to be an Assistant Secretary of the Interior, and 
           Theodore J. Garrish, of Maryland, to be an Assistant 
           Secretary (Nuclear Energy), and Tristan Abbey, of 
           Florida, to be Administrator of the Energy Information 
           Administration, both of the Department of Energy; to be 
           immediately followed by hearings to examine the 
           nominations of William L. Doffermyre, of Texas, to be 
           Solicitor of the Department of the Interior, and 
           Catherine Jereza, of Maryland, to be an Assistant 
           Secretary (Electricity), and Kyle Haustveit, of 
           Oklahoma, to be an Assistant Secretary (Fossil Energy), 
           both of the Department of Energy.
                                                            SD-366
     9:45 a.m.
       Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation
         Business meeting to consider the nomination of Paul 
           Dabbar, of New York, to be Deputy Secretary of 
           Commerce.
                                                            SR-253
     10 a.m.
       Committee on Appropriations
       Subcommittee on Department of Homeland Security
         To hold hearings to examine proposed budget estimates for 
           fiscal year 2026 for the Department of Homeland 
           Security.
                                                            SD-124
       Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation
         To hold hearings to examine winning the AI race, focusing 
           on strengthening United States capabilities in 
           computing and innovation.
                                                            SR-253
       Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions
         To hold hearings to examine the nominations of James 
           ONeill, of California, to be Deputy Secretary of 
           Health and Human Services, and Janette Nesheiwat, of 
           New York, to be Medical Director in the Regular Corps 
           of the Public Health Service, and to be Surgeon General 
           of the Public Health Service.
                                                            SD-430
     10:30 a.m.
       Committee on Foreign Relations
         Business meeting to consider the nomination of Brandon 
           Judd, of Idaho, to be Ambassador to the Republic of 
           Chile;

           to be immediately followed by a hearing to examine the 
           nomination of Caleb Orr, of Texas, to be an Assistant 
           Secretary of State (Economic and Business Affairs).
                                                            SD-419

                                 MAY 12
     3:30 p.m.
       Committee on Armed Services
       Subcommittee on Strategic Forces
         To receive a closed briefing on space superiority.
                                                           SVC-217

                                 MAY 13
     10 a.m.
       Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation
         To hold hearings to examine the nominations of David 
           Fink, of New Hampshire, to be Administrator of the 
           Federal Railroad Administration, David Fogel, of 
           Connecticut, to be Assistant Secretary and Director 
           General of the United States and Foreign Commercial 
           Service, and Pierre Gentin, of New York, to be General 
           Counsel, both of the Department of Commerce, and Robert 
           Gleason, of Pennsylvania, to be Director of the Amtrak 
           Board of Directors for a term of five years.
                                                            SR-253

                                 MAY 14
     1 p.m.
       Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions
         To hold hearings to examine the Presidents proposed 
           budget request for fiscal year 2026 for the Department 
           of Health and Human Services.
                                                            SD-430
I rise today to recognize Valerie Nelson, 
who today marks 20 years of selfless service in the United States House 
of Representatives. Her unwavering commitment to public service has not 
only benefited this institution, but it has set an example for 
generations of congressional staff to come.
  Val first entered federal service as an executive assistant to her 
home state Congressman Jim Ramstad of Minnesota, serving in his 
Washington D.C. office to support his legislative efforts. She later 
joined the leadership office of Congressman Eric Cantor where she 
served as Member Services Director. In this position, Valerie served as 
a vital link between the Republican Conference and the Whips office. 
When Congressman Cantor became Majority Leader, Val continued in this 
key role during a critical time in our conferences history.
  Upon his retirement, Val stepped away from Capitol Hill for a well-
deserved break and time in the private sector but in 2021, Val was 
recruited back to the Hill to serve as Communications Director for 
Appropriations Chairwoman Kay Granger.
  In that role, Val was instrumental in supporting the Chairwomans 
priorities by ensuring they were clearly and effectively communicated. 
She worked closely with Chairwoman Granger, committee staff and senior 
personal office staff to help shape messaging and communicate key 
initiatives to both the broader public and the constituents of Fort 
Worth. She later went on to serve as Deputy Chief of Staff.
  Her relationships across the Hill--built over two decades of trusted 
service--have already opened doors and helped my freshman office hit 
the ground running. Being a new Member of Congress comes with plenty of 
unknowns, but thanks to Vals steady leadership, these first few months 
have been marked by order, effectiveness, and forward momentum. Since 
taking office, Ive relied on Val to help build a strong team and good 
culture that ensures we are delivering results for the people of 
Indianas 8th District. The 119th Congress will be one for history 
books, and Val will be responsible for many of the core contributions 
that my office adds to that record.
  It is my honor and privilege to recognize Valerie Nelson for her 20 
years of public service in the House of Representatives. Few staffers 
reach this milestone, and even fewer do so with the level of 
dedication, professionalism, and grace that Val has consistently shown. 
We are all better for her service, thankful for her selfless 
dedication--and Im truly grateful to have her on my team.