I rise today to honor the work of the Navy 
Federal Credit Union and its strong support for the military community 
throughout California and the United States. With a statewide 
membership totaling almost 1.5 million, with 18,000 residing in my 
district, I applaud the work they do everyday to ensure that our 
beloved servicemembers have access to convenient financial services.
  Spread throughout its 50 branches in California, the Navy Federal 
Credit Union has worked tirelessly for the past 90 years to ensure that 
their mission of being the preferred financial institution to members 
of the military and their families stands true. As a member-owned and 
not-for-profit credit union, their worldwide membership consists of 
13.3 million members. Additionally, they have 356 branches worldwide, 
ensuring that all servicemembers can take advantage of their services 
and products in the pursuit of financial wellbeing.
  Furthermore, their awards and recognition speak to the impact of 
their mission for both their employees and members. With branches 
spread across the United States and the world, theyve proven that they 
provide a well-rounded workplace for their employees. Most notably, 
they have been awarded the FORTUNE 100 Best Companies to Work For and 
have been named a Top Workplace by the

Washington Post. In addition, they have proven to have a strong 
military focus when they were named the Best Military Bank/Credit Union 
by the US News and World Report.
  Their member-focused mission, including serving with compassion, 
putting members first, and championing community helps to ensure that 
there is a strong understanding of the needs for service members, while 
displaying integrity and honesty in their services.
  I ask my colleagues to join me in commemorating the work of the Navy 
Federal Credit Union and the services they provide for servicemembers 
in California and the United States.
Chief Patrick Parker grew up in Petoskey, 
Michigan as the oldest of 11 children and carried with him from a young 
age a sense of duty and responsibility. In high school, Chief Parker 
played football for the Petoskey Northmen, was a Proud Eagle Scout of 
Troop 7, and graduated in 1979. Chief Parker then attended North 
Central Michigan College where he earned an Associates Degree an later 
received a Bachelor of Science in Business Administration from Lake 
Superior State College.
  Chief Parker started his fire service career in 1983 as a volunteer 
and morphed into a part-paid/on-call firefighter and EMT. He filled 
many roles such as Firefighter, Lieutenant, Captain, and Battalion 
Chief; and in 2004, he was promoted to the rank of full-time Deputy 
Chief. On January 1, 2006, Parker became the Chief of the Grand 
Traverse Metro Fire Department, encouraging his members to foster an 
atmosphere where everyone is empowered to give their best and live up 
to the credo: Omnis Cedo Domus--Everyone Goes Home.
  Additionally, Chief Parker is involved professionally in the Michigan 
Association of Fire Chiefs Board, Northern Michigan Fire Chiefs 
Association Board, Grand Traverse County Local Emergency Planning 
Committee, Local Planning Team and 911 Advisory Board. Chief Parker is 
the founding member of MI-Mutual Aid Box Alarm System Division 3701, 
which at the time of its founding included all of Region-7. He is the 
chairperson of the MABAS-Michigan Special Operations Work Group, the 
States Urban Search and Rescue Team, overseeing Michigan Task Force-1. 
Chief Parker was Michigans representative to the Great Lakes Division 
(GLD) of the International Association of Fire Chiefs (IAFC), and he 
currently is the immediate past president of the GLD.
  Always looking for new ways to help his community, Chief Parker is 
involved with many local boards and committees, serving as the 
President of the American Red Cross--Northern Michigan, Camps and 
Services member of the Rotary Club of Traverse City, board member of 
the Rotary Camps &amp; Services with the Knights of Columbus No. 9979, and 
board member of the Michigan Crossroads Council--Boy Scouts of America. 
He is the founding member and President of the Grand Traverse Region 
First Responder Alliance, a 501(c)(3) organization founded to find 
solutions to the unmet needs of the regions first responders.
  Chief Parker is also a dedicated husband, enjoying 39 years of 
marriage to his wife Michelle and their 3 golden retrievers. In his 
spare time, he is known for being an avid hiker, hunter, and Great 
Lakes boater, and he enjoys camping and snowmobiling in the wintertime.
, its my honor to congratulate Chief Patrick Parker on an 
exemplary career and legacy of giving back to his community. I thank 
him for his humble service and wish him and his family the best in 
their future endeavors.
I rise to honor the life and legacy of Ed 
Mell, who we lost at the age of 81 on February 21, 2024. An inspiration 
to the Arizona arts community and the world, Ed will forever be 
remembered as the originator of some of the most iconic depictions of 
the desert landscape.
  A Phoenix native, Ed was born in 1942 and at a very young age was 
drawn to the arts. He went on to graduate from Phoenix Junior College 
and the ArtCenter College of Design in Pasadena. After a six-year stint 
in New York City where he pursued his interest in commercial 
advertising, Ed aspired to have greater creative freedom which he was 
only able to find back in his home state of Arizona. In 1970, Ed 
accepted a teaching position on the Hopi Reservation during which he 
rediscovered the charm and beauty of the desert. Ed then relocated to 
Phoenix and in the decades that followed, he became one of the most 
respected and venerated artists of Arizona, dedicated to capturing the 
Southwest desert landscape.
  Throughout his long career, museums and galleries around the globe 
exhibited his work, while private collectors sought the chance to add 
one of his pieces to their possessions. Although recognized globally 
for artistic accolades, Ed will always be remembered as generous and 
kind. He was a devoted friend and a loving and proud husband and 
father. Beyond his personal relationships, Eds impact can be seen in 
numerous city projects including the imposing bronze rider astride a 
bucking horse in the middle of Old Town Scottsdale and his U.S. Postal 
Service Centennial stamp.
  Eds depictions of the vibrant Arizona sunsets, sweeping vistas, and 
dramatic mountains will forever cement him as one of the greatest 
landscape artists of all time. Ed is survived by his wife, Rose Marie, 
and his son, Carson, along with a deeply admiring and extensive fan 
base.
  I thank Ed for his years of inspiration and dedication. Godspeed.
HONORING ELLISON CAPERS ``E.C. GRAYSON, JR.
today I honor the life of 
``E.C. Grayson, Jr. and offer my sympathy to his 
family. E.C. Grayson, born in 1928 in Saint Paul, Minnesota, was known 
for his vibrant personality, dedication to family and friends, and 
lifelong commitment to civil service. From his early achievements as an 
Eagle Scout, student leader, and athlete, to his distinguished career 
in the U.S. Navy, serving during the Korean war and as Assistant 
Secretary of the Navy under President Reagan, and later as a successful 
CEO and leader, E.C. left a lasting impact on all who knew him, 
celebrated in a Memorial Mass on March 1, 2024, in Tiburon, California. 
We deeply appreciate his exemplary service and personal courage, which 
epitomized the highest traditions of Navy service. I include in the 
Record the following obituary for E.C. Grayson, Jr.:

       Ellison Capers ``E.C. Grayson, passed away peacefully and 
     faithfully on January 13, 2024, in La Quinta, Calif.
       E.C. was born in Saint Paul, Minn., on September 7, 1928, 
     son of Ellison Capers Grayson, Sr. and Inez Santos Grayson; 
     and brother of Richard A. Grayson, Esq. E.C. will always be 
     remembered for his big smile, boundless energy, eternal 
     optimism, devotion to duty, honor, country, and his deep love 
     of family and friends. E.C. loved the magic of relationships, 
     knew everyone, and delighted in connecting them.
       E.C. was raised in St. Paul, Minn., and was a student 
     leader and athlete. He was an Eagle Scout, President of 
     Central High School, a lifeguard, and a varsity football 
     player. At the University of Minnesota, E.C. was President of 
     Sigma Alpha Epsilon and the Inter-Fraternity Council. He 
     loved his summers on the Isle of Palms, S.C., where his 
     family had a long history. E.C. was an athlete his entire 
     life, still swimming at 95. He loved tennis, downhill skiing, 
     running, rowing on the Bay and playing water polo on the 
     Olympic Club team. As a member of the Saint Francis and 
     Corinthian Yacht Clubs, he loved racing around the Bay on 
     ``The Darby to the delight of his granddaughters and their 
     friends.
       After graduation, E.C. joined the U.S. Navy as an officer 
     during the Korean war. From his ship, he witnessed a nuclear 
     detonation test off the Bikini Atoll. His active duty took 
     him across the Pacific and ultimately, to San Francisco, 
     where he met the love of his life, Jean Amy Mason. She was a 
     flight attendant for United Airlines and for President Dwight 
     Eisenhower during his presidential campaign. E.C. and Jean 
     were engaged in Honolulu and married on Treasure Island Naval 
     Base on December 26, 1953. They spent their honeymoon driving 
     through Europe for three months and returned home to San 
     Francisco aboard the QE II.
       Thereafter, E.C. had a successful career as an insurance 
     industry CEO. He was very active in civic affairs, including 
     as President of St. Marys Hospital and The Navy League, a 
     Regent at Saint Ignatius College Prep, Commanding Officer of 
     a Naval Intelligence Reserve unit and an advisor to Mayors 
     George Moscone and Dianne Feinstein and Governor Pete Wilson.
       In 1981, President Ronald Reagan appointed E.C. as the 
     Assistant Secretary of the Navy. He received numerous awards, 
     including the Navys Distinguished Civilian Service medal. 
     After serving in the Pentagon, E.C. returned to San Francisco 
     and joined Spencer Stuart, becoming one of the countrys top 
     ``headhunters of Fortune 500 CEOs, CFOs, and board 
     members, In later years, E.C. joined the Grayson Group as 
     senior advisor and loving mentor to its founder, Laurie 
     Grayson.
       E.C. especially loved The Bohemian Club and Grove. He was a 
     true Bohemian in spirit and deed. He also greatly enjoyed The 
     Alfalfa Club, The Knights of Malta, The Metropolitan Club of 
     Washington, D.C., and serving on The Guardsmen board. He was 
     a member of The Springs Country Club in Rancho Mirage and a 
     devout parishioner of St. Hilary Church in Tiburon.
       E.C. is survived by his wife of seventy years, Jean Mason 
     Grayson; his children, Darby Grayson Sutherland (Bruce) and 
     William Ellison ``Bill Grayson (Laurie); his four 
     granddaughters, Katherine (Washington, D.C.), Elizabeth and 
     Caroline Grayson (Manhattan), and Lauren Gordon (Austin, 
     Texas). He is also survived by Shadow, his beloved standard 
     poodle. E.C.s zest for life, service to his country, 
     devotion to his family and love of his friends will continue 
     to live on in all of us.
       The Memorial Mass was on Friday, March 1, 2024, at 1:30 
     p.m., at St. Hilary Church in Tiburon, Calif.
I rise today to honor John 
Jossell.
  John Jossell was born in Jackson, Mississippi, on December 2, 1985, 
to Michael and Evelyn Jossell. He is the second oldest of five siblings 
and spent his early years in Clarksdale, Mississippi. After attending 
Clarksdale Municipal School District, he later moved to Marks, 
Mississippi.
  During his upbringing in Quitman County, John discovered a passion 
for teaching as he practiced with his siblings. This passion led him to 
graduate from Madison S. Palmer High School with a strong desire to 
pursue a teaching career.
  Choosing Rust College as his alma mater, John focused his studies on 
English, the subject he was most passionate about teaching. As a 
student at Rust, he actively participated in the Baptist Student Union 
Gospel Choir and became a member of the esteemed Alpha Phi Alpha 
Fraternity, Inc. After graduating in 2009, Johns mother encouraged him 
to begin his teaching career in his hometown at Quitman County School 
District.
  Starting as a first-year teacher at Quitman County Middle School, 
John taught Reading. He thoroughly enjoyed the learning environment, 
the students, and the educational culture. Motivated to enhance his 
teaching skills, he pursued a masters degree in Curriculum, 
Instruction, &amp; Assessment from Walden University. This program equipped 
him with effective tools and assessment techniques to better educate 
his students. Transitioning to Madison S. Palmer High School, John 
faced the challenge of preparing students for the English II state 
test. Despite the difficulties, he found

great fulfillment in inspiring his students to excel academically 
beyond the Mississippi Delta. Recognizing his passion for teaching, 
several individuals encouraged him to explore administrative roles.
  Building on his masters degree, John decided to pursue a specialist 
degree in Educational Leadership and Administration. While serving as 
the Assistant Principal of Madison S. Palmer High School, he continued 
to teach English II. Although demanding, Johns determination propelled 
him to succeed in his position. During his tenure, numerous students 
pursued higher education outside of Mississippi, fulfilling their 
college dreams.
  Presently, John serves as the principal of Quitman County Middle 
School as he diligently works towards his doctorate degree in 
Educational Leadership &amp; Administration from Walden University. Guided 
by the scripture, ``Do everything with Love (1 Corinthians 16:14), he 
brings this spirit to his interactions with the faculty, staff, and 
students at Quitman County School District.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in recognizing Mr. John 
Jossell for his dedication in serving his school and community.
I rise today to honor the critical 
contributions of Mr. Mychal Threets to the Solano County community. As 
the Supervising Librarian at the Fairfield Civic Center Library and a 
social media content creator, Mr. Threets impacted the lives of 
countless youth in the Solano community and beyond.
  As a homeschooled student in Solano County, Mr. Threets grew up 
taking advantage of the wide array of resources and services offered at 
his local library and received his first library card at just five 
years old. After earning his masters degree in library information 
science, Mr. Threets began working at the Fairfield Civic Center 
Library in 2013 and helped expand the library programs and resources 
that were fundamental to his education.
  With the growing mental health crisis and declining literacy rates, 
He wanted to 
ensure people knew that libraries are not just places with books but 
offer something for everyone. Through his social media posts, Mr. 
Threets shared stories about the vital role libraries play in peoples 
lives and the ``library joy he sees in action every day. Mr. Threets 
used his viral social media presence to spread kindness and inspire 
American youth to fall in love with reading and libraries, just as he 
did.
  For his advocacy and outspoken love of libraries, Mr. Threets was one 
of 10 librarians across the country to win the I Love My Librarian 
Award for Public Service. While Mr. Threets will be stepping away from 
his role in the Solano County Library, I know he will continue striving 
to improve the Solano community and increase literacy rates for young 
children. I look forward to seeing his work to expand access to 
educational resources and make our communities more inclusive.
it is in the spirit of 
bereavement that I rise to recognize the remarkable life of former 
Florida State Senator Betty Holzendorf. As a dedicated public servant, 
community leader, and advocate for social justice, her impact on the 
city of Jacksonville and the great State of Florida and its people will 
be felt for generations to come.
  Senator Holzendorf passed away on February 29, 2024 at the age of 84.
  As a lifelong resident of Jacksonville, Senator Holzendorf dedicated 
her life to the betterment of her community. She received her 
bachelors degree from Edward Waters University and her masters in 
educational administration from the University of North Florida, the 
latter of which has a road named after her on campus.
  As a former public school teacher and administrator at her alma 
mater, Edward Waters University, she was committed to quality education 
and began her career in public service in 1975 as an affirmative action 
officer under Jacksonville Mayor Hans Tanzler. Following several years 
of service in this role, she joined the staff of Jacksonville Mayor 
Jake Godbold as City Council liaison, where she developed the political 
skills that would catapult her into the Florida House of 
Representatives in 1988.

  Throughout her esteemed career, Senator Holzendorf championed causes 
that uplifted the most vulnerable members of her community. Whether it 
was fighting for affordable housing, advocating for quality education, 
or promoting access to healthcare, she never wavered in her dedication 
to improving the lives of her constituents, especially children.
  Senator Holzendorfs passion for justice and equality was matched 
only by her unwavering determination to create positive change. After 
four years in the Florida House, she served with distinction in the 
Florida State Senate from 1992 to 2002, where her leadership earned her 
the respect and admiration of colleagues on both sides of the aisle.
  Beyond her legislative accomplishments, Senator Holzendorf was a 
pillar of her community, known for her kindness, compassion, and 
incredible cooking. Her impact extended far beyond the boundaries of 
Tallahassee and Jacksonville, truly touching the lives of countless 
individuals throughout Florida.
  My heart is with Senator Holzendorfs family during this time of 
mourning. May they find solace in knowing that her legacy will live on 
in the hearts and minds of all who had the privilege of knowing her, 
and may her memory be for a blessing.
I rise to recognize the return of the Shen Yun 
Performing Arts Company to the David H. Koch theater at Lincoln Center 
in New York City in April 2024.
  Shen Yun Performing Arts was established in New York in 2006 and has 
become a worldwide phenomenon as they travel to 180 cities every year 
to perform. Millions of people travel to see this unique performance 
time and time again and with the development of new dances each year, 
the performers, choreographers, and conductors continually develop an 
amazing show for all to enjoy.
  The ancient Chinese traditions that are rooted in virtue, faith, and 
moral values are brought to life in the performances that feature 
dancing and singing with performers wearing intricate costumes. 
Artistic freedom is essential to a society and Shen Yun expresses that 
ideal in the face of continued opposition from the Chinese government.
  I had the privilege of meeting many members of the Shen Yun community 
located in my distict and watched the performance in Washington, D.C. 
It was a huge honor to see such talent.
  I want to thank the members of Shen Yun for their great success thus 
far and wish them all the best performing at Lincoln Center.
I introduce the Washington, D.C. Area 
Helicopter Noise Information Exchange Act, which would require the 
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) to create and implement a 
helicopter noise-sharing mechanism for all helicopter operators in the 
National Capital Region (NCR) and to make such mechanism accessible to 
the public online. I got this bill included in the Securing Growth and 
Robust Leadership in American Aviation Act (H.R. 3935), which the House 
passed last year.
  Residents of the NCR have been plagued by helicopter noise for years. 
Yet, there is no centralized complaint system nor any comprehensive 
data about helicopter noise in the NCR Helicopter noise can harm 
health, quality of life, and the structural integrity of homes. In 
2019, I led members of the NCR in requesting that the Government 
Accountability Office (GAO) study helicopter noise in the NCR. In 2021, 
GAO recommended that the FAA implement a noise sharing mechanism for 
helicopter operators in the NCR.
  In 2022, the FAA initiated a pilot program with a private company to 
create a helicopter noise sharing mechanism in the NCR. After the end 
of the pilot program, Fairfax and Arlington Counties contracted with 
the private company to maintain such a mechanism solely for Northern 
Virginia. However, the company is not required to share the collected 
data with any jurisdictions, other than those in Northern Virginia, or 
the public. The FAA must be involved in the collection and analysis of 
helicopter noise data in the NCR to effectively address the impacts on 
the public, and the public has a right to know the source of the noise.
  This bill would direct the creation of a more effective information 
sharing mechanism, which would allow for better, more comprehensive 
data on helicopter noise complaints. This data would in turn help us 
develop solutions to address helicopter noise.
  I urge my colleagues to support this bill.
RECOGNIZING TAMPA BAYS TRAILBLAZER WALLACE Z. BOWERS, IN HONOR OF 
                               of florida
I rise today to honor and 
celebrate the remarkable contributions and achievements of a 
distinguished individual of the Tampa Bay community, Mr. Wallace Z. 
Bowers. Supported by his wife, Lois Bowers, and son, Warren Lyle 
Bowers, his lifelong dedication to community service, advocacy, and 
leadership embodies the spirit of stewardship we all must strive 
towards.
, FL, the 11th of 13 children. In 
describing his upbringing, Mr. Bowers considered himself a ``country 
boy, and often recalls the lessons of hard work and ``making a 
difference which his parents instilled in him and his siblings. This 
foundation inspired a call to service in the U.S. Army and later, his 
decades of community service within the Tampa Bay community. After 
returning from military service, Mr. Bowers moved to Tampa, Florida, 
eventually settling in a little community called Progress Village. He 
went on to study at the University of Tampa, Tampa Bible College and 
Florida Theological Seminary &amp; Bible College.
, 
a Tampa-based community organization which played a pivotal role in 
offsetting the displacement of African Americans during the Civil 
Rights era. He also co-founded and served as President from 1986 until 
1996 of the Progress Village Foundation which provides scholarships to 
local students. Mr. Bowers also played a pivotal role in rezoning 
negotiations with the Hillsborough County Commission, resulting in 
significant benefits for the community, including the revitalization of 
the Progress Village Park, and various other improvements.
1983 to 
1989, where he served as Chair during the later years of his tenure. 
Additionally, his dedication to transportation and community 
development is reflected in his roles as a county appointee to the 
Hillsborough County Regional Transit Authority (HART) and as a past 
member of the Hillsborough County Metropolitan Planning Organization 
(MPO) Board and Tampa Streetcar Board.
  Throughout his life Mr. Bowers has invested in the communities and 
people of Tampa. And often recalling his parents teachings of hard 
work and making a difference, Mr. Bowers was always aware of his higher 
calling as a spiritual leader. He was the Vice Moderator of the Mount 
Pilgrim Association for six years and is currently a member of the 
Progressive M &amp; E Baptist State Convention of Florida and National 
Baptist Convention of America International, Inc. As a licensed and 
ordained minister, he led and pastored the Saint Mary Missionary 
Baptist Church from 1996 to 2018 being given the honorary title of 
Pastor Emeritus.
  In 1970, Mr. Bowers founded his own real estate business and has been 
practicing for over five decades. His entrepreneurial spirit also led 
him to own and operate Bowers Barber Shop. Mr. Bowers served as the 
Property Manager for the Progress Village Shopping Center and 
Progressive M &amp; E Baptist State Convention Headquarters, always working 
hard and always making a difference.
Not only has he led by that example for decades, but 
he has helped establish a foundation in the community that would ensure 
future generations, regardless of where they were from or the 
challenges they face so that they have the appropriate educational, 
economic, and social opportunities needed to achieve success.
, I am honored to recognize Mr. Wallace Z. Bowers, whose 
work is engraved in the streets of our Tampa community. His legacy of 
service, leadership, and hard work serve as an inspiration to future 
generations.
born and raised in Blackwood, New Jersey, 
Specialist Justin Medina has shown dedication and commitment throughout 
his life. During his time at Highland Regional High School, he was 
involved in sports. Immediately after graduating from Highland Regional 
High School, Specialist Justin Medina enlisted in the United States 
Army.
  Specialist Justin Medina enlisted in February of 2021 and served for 
two years, achieving the rank of PSE E-4, before he was honorably 
discharged in 2023. Specialist Justin Medina served as a paratrooper 
during his enlistment, and he was stationed at Fort Bragg, now known as 
Fort Liberty.
  During his tenure in the United States Armed Forces, he served with 
distinction. Specialist Justin Medina was the recipient of multiple 
Army Commendation Medals which are granted for sustained acts of 
heroism or meritorious service.
  Following his military service, Specialist Justin Medina began 
working as a security officer and is presently employed at a local 
smoke shop. Throughout his career he has shown a willingness to learn 
in different environments.
  Today, Specialist Justin Medina is determined to further his 
education and pursue a college degree and he desires to earn a Real 
Estate License. Specialist Justin Medina has a strong work ethic, and 
there is no doubt that he will continue to make significant 
contributions to our community.
, I ask you to join me in honoring and commending 
Specialist Justin Medina for his service to his community, the United 
States Army, and to the United States of America.