I rise today to honor and celebrate the 
life of Patsy Pettus, a cherished member of our community. Patsy is an 
extraordinary individual whose life has exemplified nothing short of 
the beauty in living life curiously.
  Patsy is a passionate member of the Richmond community. Through her 
love of art and architecture, she has bettered the lives of everyone 
around her. Described by many as the ``role model for aging 
gracefully, her lively character has made her a beloved figure to all 
who have the joy of knowing her. Patsys commitment to the local 
community leaves an indelible mark on our district and beyond.
  Patsys efforts as an advocate for art programs across the state will 
leave a legacy to inspire generations to come. The Virginia Museum of 
Fine Arts, where she volunteered as a docent decades ago, has benefited 
greatly from her and her beloved husband Hunters generosity and 
support. Her familys contributions to Virginia Commonwealth 
Universitys (VCU) Institute for Contemporary Arts helped transform the 
creative arts programs at VCU. Ask anyone in Richmonds art scene and 
Patsys name will bring a sparkle to their eyes--She has always been 
known as the life of the party.
, I ask my colleagues in the House of Representatives to 
join me in celebrating Patsy. Our community is eternally grateful for 
everything she and her husband Hunter have done.
I rise today to recognize the 
extraordinary dedication and service of Judy Adams, Director of the I 
Support the 1% Food Pantry. The I Support the 1% Food Pantry, an 
organization celebrating its 10th anniversary this year, is committed 
to ensuring that no veteran in Michigan goes hungry. Through their 
tireless efforts, Judy and her team have provided not just food but 
also hope and dignity to those who bravely served our Nation.
  Founded on July 28, 2014, and opening its doors in April 2015, the I 
Support the 1% Food Pantry was established in response to the growing 
crisis of food insecurity among veterans and military reserve members. 
Too many of our Nations heroes struggle to put food on the table, 
often feeling ashamed or hopeless in their hardship Judy and her team 
understand the critical need for support and made it their mission to 
ensure that ``No Veteran Should Ever Go Hungry.
  The pantry partners with VA social workers, including those in the 
HUD-VASH Homeless program and Home-Based Primary Care program, to 
ensure food reaches veterans in need--even those who are homebound due 
to medical conditions.
  Additionally, the I Support the 1% Food Pantry works directly with 
military reserve units, assisting service members and their families 
during times of financial difficulty. Since its founding, the pantry 
has served over 1,000 veterans across Michigan, including WWII and 
Korean War veterans living on fixed incomes, combat-wounded veterans, 
and those struggling with PTSD and economic hardship. For many, the 
pantry is the difference between going hungry and being able to provide 
for their families. Thanks to Judy Adams and I Support the 1% Food 
Pantry, these veterans now have a place to turn for assistance and 
compassion.
, the work of Judy Adams and the I Support the 1% Food 
Pantry is a testament to the power of community and service. Their 
unwavering commitment to Michigans veterans embodies the very spirit 
of selflessness and patriotism. Today, we honor Judy Adams for her 
leadership, her compassion, and her unyielding dedication to ensuring 
that those who have served our Nation never have to face hunger alone.
I rise today to recognize a devoted mother, 
a woman of faith, and an extraordinary Georgian, Mrs. Rosa Mae 
Williams. Mrs. Williams celebrated her 95th birthday with her family 
and friends on March 22, 2025, in Leary, Georgia.
, Georgia on March 22, 1930. 
Throughout her 95 years on this earth, she has exemplified hard work, 
resilience, and dedication to her community. As a single mother who 
raised 13 children, she faced great challenges but never wavered in her 
commitment to her childrens education and success. Mrs. Williams takes 
great pride in her children, and while she did not have the opportunity 
to receive a formal education herself, she was successful in steering 
most of her kids towards earning a degree of higher education. They 
attended institutions such as Morehouse College, Spelman College, 
Georgia Tech, Clark Atlanta University, and Albany State University.
  A woman of strong faith, Mrs. Williams has been a member of Bethel 
C.M.E. Church in Leary for over 70 years where she currently holds the 
position of Mother of the Church. Her deep faith has been the guiding 
light of her life, and her legacy is rooted in her devotion to both her 
family and her Heavenly Father.
, education, and faith. Over the course of her life, she has been 
proud to see her offspring continue to make meaningful contributions to 
the community. Thanks to her devoted parenting, her children have gone 
on to take on professions as attorneys, educators, elected officials, 
corporate managers, and more.
  Former Congresswoman Shirley Chisholm once said that ``service is the 
rent we pay for the space we occupy here on this earth. As we 
celebrate Mrs. Williams 95 years of life, we can say without a doubt 
that Mrs. Rosa Mae Williams has paid her rent and paid it well. Her 
dedicated life of service to her family and community is truly 
commendable. I know that her children and grandchildren are very proud 
of her and look up to their matriarch as a role model of faith and 
unconditional love.
, I ask my colleagues in the United States House of 
Representatives to join my wife Vivian, and me--along with the family 
and loved ones of Mrs. Rosa Mae Williams--in extending our heartfelt 
congratulations and best wishes to her on this remarkable occasion. May 
God continue to bless her with health, peace, and joy, and may her 
example continue to inspire us all.
I rise today to honor a 
truly exceptional organization, the Theta Pi Zeta Chapter of Zeta Phi 
Beta Sorority, Inc., based in Itta Bena, Mississippi. Since its 
inception, the chapter has been a steadfast beacon of service, 
community involvement, and the embodiment of the principles upheld by 
Zeta Phi Beta.
  Founded on November 10, 1976, with the leadership of then State 
Director Bertha Blackburn and co-founders Henri E. Lowe and Maxine P. 
Stewart, Theta Pi Zeta began its journey in a small yet significant way 
at the Western Sizzlin Steak House in Greenwood, Mississippi. The 
chapters roots are deeply intertwined with the spirit of dedication, 
as evidenced by the work of Henri E. Lowe and MElena Matthews, who 
signed the chapters charter application, helping to ensure its 
establishment.
  Throughout the years, 14 remarkable women have served as president, 
with the late Henri E. Lowe leading the charge during the formative 
years. Currently, under the leadership of Denise Pitchford, the chapter 
continues its dedication to service and community outreach, earning 
recognition at the state and regional levels. The chapter boasts 32 
financial members and has been involved in countless community 
initiatives, such as hosting a State Round-Up for Zetas in Greenwood, 
Mississippi, and supporting local events like the March for Babies 
campaign.
  The Itta Bena Amicae Auxiliary, established in 1986 and sponsored by 
Sister Shirley Burks, remains a vital part of the chapters outreach 
efforts, and the chapters youth auxiliaries--including the Archonette, 
Amicette, and Pearlette Clubs--engage in community service projects 
like adopting families for Thanksgiving and Christmas, ringing 
Salvation Army bells, and delivering care bags to local nursing homes.
  The chapters charter members, such as Riller Bennett, Thelma 
Collins, Laura Davis, Doroty Edwards, Amanda Elzy, Anna Hicks, Irene 
Howard, Zelma Howard, Jean Jennings, Henri E. Lowe, MElena Mathews, 
Betty Morris, Geneva Pickens, Henrine Stewart, Bobbie Wicks, Ann 
Wilson, and Malinda Winters laid the foundation for what has become a 
powerful and enduring force in the Mississippi Delta. Many of them have 
left lasting legacies, including the late Henri E. Lowe, and Florence 
Weathersby, who served for an impressive 70 years and remained an 
inspiration to many.
  The chapters commitment to service continues with a full slate of 
community activities for 2025, including events like hosting a 
Sisterhood Tea for Womens History Month, visiting nursing homes, 
organizing water hydration drives, and supporting the March of Dimes 
Campaign.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in taking a moment to 
acknowledge the Theta Pi Zeta Chapter of Zeta Phi Beta Sorority, Inc., 
for their unwavering dedication to service, leadership, and the 
betterment of their community.
I rise in honor of Brenda Faye Graham 
Johnson, who passed away on March 26th at the age of 77.
  On March 31, 1947, Ms. Johnson was born in Christiansburg, Virginia, 
but was raised in nearby Salem, Virginia. After graduating from Andrew 
Lewis High School, she attended Marion College in Marion, Virginia. Ms. 
Johnson graduated as part of the last class from Marion College.
  Following her studies at Radford University, where she earned a 
teaching degree, Ms. Johnson taught in the classroom. She stayed close 
to Southwest Virginia during her life and raised a family with her 
loving husband, Don, by her side.
  In addition to her service as an educator, Ms. Johnson helped 
contribute to the Republican Party of Virginia in various capacities.
  Primarily, Ms. Johnson held officer roles in the Republican Party of 
Bristol and the Republican Party of Salem, two units who helped shape 
local conservative candidates for elected office.
  Virginias Ninth District Republican Committee benefitted from Ms. 
Johnsons loyalty and service, particularly in her role as the 
Committees official secretary. This sometimes required her throughout 
the year to drive away from home to assist the Committee with its 
meetings and business.
  A woman of strong faith and appreciation for the Lord, Ms. Johnson 
was an active member of Salems First United Methodist Church.
  In addition to her husband, family remaining to cherish her memory 
includes her children, Jessica J. Funk (Kevin), and Lauren J. Paige, 
both of Richmond, Va.; grandson, Declan Funk; siblings, Connie Melton 
(Carter), Jennifer Brown (Bill), and Bradley Graham; and many nieces 
and nephews.
  I always appreciated her dedication to the Republican Party and 
helping the various Republican committees where she was living.
  Further, Brenda and her husband helped to start the Salem G.O.P.s 
annual Olde Salem Days Breakfast which has grown into a major event for 
candidates seeking a Republican nomination in Virginia.
Whether it was helping a student with reading or 
passing out campaign literature to voters, Ms. Johnson made a profound 
impression on those around her. She will be missed.
due to unforseen 
scheduling complications, I was unable to attend the first vote in the 
series. Had I been present, I would have voted YEA on Roll Call No. 77.
I rise today to recognize the career and 
legacy of Bob Davidson. Bob is retiring after 23 years of committed 
service as the CEO and President of the Seattle Aquarium. I am so 
grateful for his tireless efforts to make the Seattle Aquarium a leader 
in conservation, education, and visitor experience.
  Thanks to Bobs leadership, the Seattle Aquarium is now the largest 
marine conservation institution in the northwestern United States. His 
work has transformed the Seattle Aquarium from a local aquarium into a 
globally recognized conservation organization. Bob waited to step down 
from his post until the completion of the $180 million Ocean Pavilion, 
which highlights sea life in the biodiverse Indo-Pacific Coral Triangle 
and educates guests on how we must work together to protect the worlds 
oceans. His wide array of professional experiences helped him forge the 
partnerships necessary to complete the Ocean Pavilion project. Bob also 
led Woodland Park Zoos $40 million renovation project that transformed 
the zoo into a modern leader for design and habitats.
  Thanks to Bob Davidsons many accomplishments, Seattle has seen 
significant expansion and continued improvement of the Aquariums 
buildings, the ongoing transformation of the Seattle waterfront, and 
the growing reputation of the Seattle Aquarium as a global leader in 
ocean conservation. I am very grateful for his incredible service and 
confident that he will continue to be a staunch advocate for protecting 
our oceans and sea life. His leadership will serve as a model for years 
to come.
I rise today to recognize Nathan 
Whittington of Broomfield, Colorado for receiving the 2024 Statewide 
Emergency Manager of the Year Award.
  As the Jefferson County Sheriffs Offices Emergency Manager, Nathan 
leads coordination and response plans during natural disasters and 
other emergencies. He was instrumental in developing Jeffcos new 
Emergency Operations Center. During the Quarry Fire in 2024, Nathan 
managed the EOC and re-entry plans--ensuring all evacuees were able to 
return home safely. Nathans commitment to public service extends 
beyond Jefferson County--he also deployed to Sarasota County, Florida 
to provide critical support during Hurricane Milton.
  Nathan has led the way in adapting innovative technology and 
strategies that have strengthened our communitys preparedness and 
resilience. We are grateful for his leadership and commitment to 
keeping our communities safe.
  On behalf of the people of Colorados Seventh Congressional District, 
it is my honor to thank Nathan Whittington for his service to the 
Jefferson County community.
Mr Speaker, I am proud to honor Commander Jon 
Lux, U.S. Navy, Retired, with a Congressional Veteran Commendation. 
Commander Luxs commitment, strength, and leadership reflects the very 
best of Texas.
  Commander Luxs distinguished naval career spanned over 2 decades. 
After being commissioned as an Ensign in the U.S. Navy, he served as a 
Surface Warfare Officer on multiple sea tours, primarily in the Middle 
East. His assignments also include serving as Commander, Mine Warfare 
Command and Commander, Mine Countermeasures Squadron Three, as well as 
Executive Officer of Naval Station Ingleside, Texas.
  Following his military service, Commander Lux continued to 
demonstrate his dedication to his community. He has served on the Cedar 
Park City Council, the Cedar Park Tourism and Advisory Board, and the 
Planning and Zoning Committee. Additionally, he is a member of the 
Board of Directors for the Williamson County Appraisal Board, where he 
also chaired the Bond Oversight Committee. Driven by a passion for 
service, Commander Lux was a founding member of American Legion Post 
911 in Cedar Park, raising funds for the Gold Star Monument and 
supporting Boys and Girls State programs. Commander Lux is a devoted 
husband to his wife, Michelle, and a proud father to their two 
children.
  I commend Commander Luxs dedication to his community and our Nation. 
I join his colleagues, family, and friends, in honoring his career, 
saluting his commitment to public service, and celebrating his 
outstanding achievements.
I am proud to salute the 
extraordinary career of Major General Patrick Hamilton, U.S. Army, 
Retired, with a Congressional Veteran Commendation. His service to both 
the Army and

his Nation exemplifies our Nations altruistic spirit.
  MG Hamilton served honorably in Armor and Cavalry units in the Texas 
Army National Guard for 35 years. He served full time in operational 
assignments including Director of the Joint Staff, Chief of Staff to 
the Adjutant General of Texas, and the Texas Army National Guard 
Director of Operations.
  In 2000, MG Hamilton served with the 49th Armored Division in Bosnia-
Herzegovina as the Current Operations Officer. He later deployed to 
Afghanistan where he served as the Red Team Leader for the Commanding 
General. Additionally in 2017, he served as the Joint Task Force 
Commanding General for Hurricane Harvey military response, commanding 
18,000 troops supporting evacuation and aid operations.
  From 2018 to 2021, MG Hamilton served as the Commanding General of 
the 36th Infantry Division, where he commanded soldiers in nine 
countries across the Middle East as part of Task Force Spartan, under 
Operation Spartan Shield.
  MG Hamiltons retirement did not end his service. He continues to 
train National Guard Division Commanders and staffs. In addition, he 
serves on the Board of Directors for the Central Texas YMCA and the 
Board of Governors of the Central Texas Community Foundation. For his 
extraordinary efforts during and after service he was awarded the 2023 
Lieutenant General Raymond S. McLain Medal.
  I am honored to join MG Hamiltons friends and family in celebrating 
his outstanding achievements. His commitment to selfless service makes 
him a deeply respected and honorable recipient of the Congressional 
Veteran Commendation.
Title IV of Senate Resolution 4, agreed to by the Senate of February 
4, 1977, calls for establishment of a system for a computerized 
schedule of all meetings and hearings of Senate committees, 
subcommittees, joint committees, and committees of conference. This 
title requires all such committees to notify the Office of the Senate 
Daily Digest--designated by the Rules Committee--of the time, place and 
purpose of the meetings, when scheduled and any cancellations or 
changes in the meetings as they occur.
  As an additional procedure along with the computerization of this 
information, the Office of the Senate Daily Digest will prepare this 
information for printing in the Extensions of Remarks section of the 
Congressional Record on Monday and Wednesday of each week.
  Meetings scheduled for Tuesday, April 1, 2025 may be found in the 
Daily Digest of todays Record.

                                APRIL 2
     10 a.m.
       Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation
         To hold hearings to examine restoring Boeings status as 
           a great American manufacturer, focusing on safety 
           first.
                                                            SD-G50
       Committee on Energy and Natural Resources
         To hold hearings to examine the nominations of Katharine 
           MacGregor, of Florida, to be Deputy Secretary of the 
           Interior, and James Danly, of Tennessee, to be Deputy 
           Secretary of Energy.
                                                            SD-366
       Committee on Environment and Public Works
         To hold hearings to examine constructing the Surface 
           Transportation Reauthorization bill, focusing on United 
           States Secretary of Transportations perspective.
                                                            SD-406

       Committee on Foreign Relations
         Business meeting to consider pending calendar 
           nominations.
                                                             S-116
     10:15 a.m.
       Committee on the Judiciary
         To hold hearings to examine District Judges, focusing on 
           exploring legislative solutions to the bipartisan 
           problem of universal injunctions.
                                                            SD-226
     2:30 p.m.
       Committee on Indian Affairs
         To hold an oversight hearing to examine Native American 
           education, focusing on Federal programs at the U.S. 
           Department of Education.
                                                            SD-628
       Committee on Small Business and Entrepreneurship
         Business meeting to consider S. 1199, SBA Fraud 
           Enforcement Extension Act.
                                                           SR-428A
       Select Committee on Intelligence
         To receive a closed briefing on certain intelligence 
           matters.
                                                            SH-219

                                APRIL 3
     9:30 a.m.
       Committee on Armed Services
         To hold hearings to examine the posture of the United 
           States European Command and United States Africa 
           Command in review of the Defense Authorization Request 
           for fiscal year 2026 and the Future Years Defense 
           Program; to be immediately followed by a closed hearing 
           in SVC-217.
                                                            SD-G50
       Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
         To hold hearings to examine the nominations of Scott 
           Kupor, of California, to be Director of the Office of 
           Personnel Management, and Eric Matthew Ueland, of 
           Virginia, to be Deputy Director for Management, Office 
           of Management and Budget.
                                                            SD-342
     10 a.m.
       Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs
         Business meeting to consider the nominations of Paul 
           Atkins, of Virginia, to be a Member of the Securities 
           and Exchange Commission, Jonathan Gould, of Virginia, 
           to be Comptroller of the Currency, and Luke Pettit, of 
           the District of Columbia, to be an Assistant Secretary, 
           both of the Department of the Treasury, and Marcus 
           Molinaro, of New York, to be Federal Transit 
           Administrator, Department of Transportation.
                                                            SD-538
     10:15 a.m.
       Committee on the Judiciary
         Business meeting to consider S. 527, to require the 
           Federal Trade Commission to study the role of 
           intermediaries in the pharmaceutical supply chain and 
           provide Congress with appropriate policy 
           recommendations, S. 1040, to amend the Federal Trade 
           Commission Act to prohibit product hopping, S. 1041, to 
           amend title 35, United States Code, to address the 
           infringement of patents that claim biological products, 
           S. 1097, to amend title 35, United States Code, to 
           establish an interagency task force between the United 
           States Patent and Trademark Office and the Food and 
           Drug Administration for purposes of sharing information 
           and providing technical assistance with respect to 
           patents, S. 1095, to enable the Federal Trade 
           Commission to deter filing of sham citizen petitions to 
           cover an attempt to interfere with approval of a 
           competing generic drug or biosimilar, to foster 
           competition, and facilitate the efficient review of 
           petitions filed in good faith to raise legitimate 
           public health concerns, and S. 1096, to prohibit brand 
           name drug companies from compensating generic drug 
           companies to delay the entry of a generic drug into the 
           market, and to prohibit biological product 
           manufacturers from compensating biosimilar and 
           interchangeable companies to delay the entry of 
           biosimilar biological products and interchangeable 
           biological products, and the nomination of Patrick 
           David Davis, of Maryland, to be an Assistant Attorney 
           General, Department of Justice.
                                                            SH-216
     10:30 a.m.
       Committee on Foreign Relations
         Business meeting to consider pending nominations.
                                                             S-116

                                APRIL 9
     2:30 p.m.
       Committee on Armed Services
       Subcommittee on Personnel
         To hold hearings to examine personnel policies and 
           programs in review of the Defense Authorization Request 
           for fiscal year 2026 and the Future Years Defense 
           Program.
                                                            SR-222