I rise today to honor the 
achievements of Supervisor Keith Carson, who has represented the 5th 
District on the Alameda County Board of Supervisors since 1992. 
Supervisor Carson has been a fearless leader in Alameda County, 
fighting for access to health care, improving business retention, 
addressing the scarcity of jobs in our communities, and ending poverty 
and homelessness. He approaches his role as Supervisor with the goal of 
creating a more inclusive and accessible government for the people of 
Alameda County.

  Supervisor Carson is a Bay Area native from Berkeley, California. He 
has a B.A. in Political Science and Business Administration from the 
University of California, Berkeley, a Master of Public Administration 
from Cal State University, East Bay, and a Juris Doctor from the John 
F. Kennedy School of Law.
  Keith Carson has a long history of supporting our community through 
involvement in local politics. His interest in politics began in the 
Youth in Government program, where he was able to join a student 
assembly in Sacramento and learn about the government and legislative 
processes. He then served as an intern for Berkeleys first Black 
mayor, Warren Widener, as a student, and later went on to work for 
former Congressman Ron Dellums after his graduation from UC Berkeley. 
After working for Congressman Dellums for fifteen years in both his 
district and D.C. offices, Carson ran for the Alameda County Board of 
Supervisors in 1992.
  As Supervisor, Carson chairs many Alameda County committees, 
including the East Bay Economic Development Alliance, the Alameda 
County Budget Work Group Committee, the Alameda County Personnel, 
Administration, and Legislation Committee, and the Alameda County 
Health Committee. As chair of the Budget Committee, Carson championed a 
more inclusive and transparent budgeting process for the county.
  In addition to chairing committees, Supervisor Carson represents the 
Board of Supervisors on the Board of Directors for many local 
organizations, including the Executive Committee of the California 
State Association of Counties, the National Association of Counties, 
and the National Organization of Black County Officials. He is also a 
member of the Alameda County Transportation Commission, the Alameda 
County Employees Retirement Association, and the Bay Area Council 
Economic Institute.
  Carsons many accomplishments as Supervisor over the years include 
creating AC Impact, a program that aims to reduce homelessness in 
Alameda County by providing permanent and supportive housing to 
chronically homeless adults. He has also been a leader in bringing the 
county to a more sustainable future, adopting a Green Building 
Ordinance that requires county municipal projects to be built to a U.S. 
Green Building Council LEED Silver standard. Additionally, he has 
supported the funding of a Community Capacity Fund, which helps 
community organizations deliver re-entry services for formerly 
incarcerated individuals.
  Carsons 30+ years of service have undoubtably made Alameda County a 
better, more inclusive place. Supervisor Keith Carson is a beloved 
leader in our community, and I honor and thank him for his dedication 
to supporting Alameda County over the years.
I rise today to honor the life 
and legacy of Mary Yvonne Myers, a beloved wife, mother, and 
grandmother, and cherished Oakland community member. She was born on 
October 29, 1937, in Hattiesburg, Mississippi as the eldest child to 
parents James Calvin and Nancy Stewart Slaughter. Mary, later known as 
`Yvonne moved from Mississippi to San Diego, California in 1953 with 
her family. Her family flourished in their business ventures and elite 
social circles in California. In San Diego, Yvonne was mentored by her 
Aunt Mae, who was part of a group of African American entrepreneurs and 
community leaders in the area.
  After completing her high school education at San Diego High School, 
Yvonne and her family moved to Northern California in 1959. Yvonne 
began a fellowship with the Faith Chapel Church of God in Christ, where 
she met Minister Levi Young. They were married in August of 1961, and 
had three wonderful children together, along with Levis son from a 
previous union. Through this marriage, Yvonne developed a love for 
ministry as she walked in the office of First Lady of the Revelation 
Church of God In Christ. Under the leadership of her husband and pastor 
she was licensed as a Missionary in the Church of God in Christ, and as 
the First Lady, Yvonne mentored many young women as they began their 
Christian journey. As the Executive Administrator of Charles Harrison 
Mason Bible College, Yvonne ensured that students were successful in 
their quest to get a deeper understanding of the Word of God. In the 
late 70s, Yvonne and Levi amicably took separate directions in life, 
dissolving their union.
  Yvonne remained very involved in Christian churches and continued to 
mentor young women in the church. In the late 1980s, Yvonne met the 
love of her life Reverend Clayton Myers, Jr. In July of 1989 the two 
were united in holy matrimony, a match truly made in heaven. Together, 
they led the auxiliary ministry of Evergreens senior living facility, 
The JL Richards Terrace.

  Later, Yvonne returned to the Evergreen Missionary Baptist Church, 
and served in a variety of ministry positions: Usher, Missionary, 
Hospitality, Greeter, Sunday School Department, and more. She used her 
positions to help children in the community, leading the `Kids Closet, 
which aimed to ensure that all children had adequate clothing and basic 
supplies. Her passion and support for children continued outside of the 
church, as she used the office of PTA President to bring about many 
changes for students and families at Washington Elementary School.
  She continued her involvement in the Oakland community, serving as 
Commissioner of the Parks and Recreation Commission, championing many 
efforts to preserve the historic Childrens Fairyland. She also worked 
on the Oakland Parental Education Program (P.E.P.), where Yvonne and 
her team trained parents through extensive workshops and training 
courses. She later returned to schools as the on-site Parent 
Coordinator for Peralta Elementary School, where she created Black 
History programs and led holiday donation drives. Yvonne considered the 
programs she implemented for kids and parents over her life to be her 
greatest accomplishments.
  Mary Yvonne Myers was thankful for her opportunity to hold leadership 
within her community. She was thankful for her family, and for the many 
roles God entrusted her with, including wife, mother, friend, and 
cousin. Yvonne Myers was the Matriarch of her family, and was proud of 
the accomplishments of her children, grandchildren, and great-
grandchildren, who she considered ``future world changers. As the 
Matriarch, she was often fondly referred to as the ``Queen. She 
became popular on social media in her later years and ending her videos 
with ``Peace Out was her signature.
  With family by her side, The Queen gave her final ``Peace Out on 
December 11, 2023, at 5:05 p.m. Her presence will be missed but her 
spirit and influence will live on for generations to come.
  She is survived by sons Donald Scotty Young, Kenny (Kelly) Young, 
daughter Regina (Kelvin) Alexander, grandchildren Charles (Shane) 
Young, Andre Young, Brittney Young, Kelvin (Rochelle) Alexander, Keena 
Young, Rochad Young, Korey Alexander, Shaun Young, Demarcus (Shannon) 
Young, Dominik Young, one godson Antoine (Charisse) Jones. Fourteen 
great-grandchildren and two great-great grandchildren, first cousins 
Rev. Dr. Clyde Oden, Jr., Dr. Robert Stanley Oden, Douglas Oden, Esq, 
Barbara Ann Slaughter, Fredrika Slaughter-Newton and a host of other 
cousins and friends.
I rise today to recognize the First 
Christian Church of Gainesville, Texas as it celebrates the 150th 
Anniversary of its founding. Im pleased to congratulate the 
congregation on this significant milestone. With its long and storied 
history in Cooke County, it is truly an honor to join the congregation 
in recognition of the longevity of First Christian Church.
  The church had a presence in Gainesville for several years before its 
members officially organized as a congregation, meeting first in a 
local schoolhouse then at the Cooke County Courthouse. The congregation 
officially organized as the Dixon Street Christian Church on Sunday May 
10, 1874, with thirteen original members. Those charter members were 
John Darnell, Mollie Lee, Dr. and Mrs. Thomas Barrett, 
Brother Hill and Aunt Nancy Hill, Mrs. Jennie Stewart, Mr. and Mrs. 
John Bailey, Mr. and Mrs. Matthews and Mrs. B.F. Carpenter. Church 
records are unclear as to who served as the churchs first minister. 
One account lists Dr. Thomas C. Barrett as the first minister, serving 
from 1874 to 1878. A different source identifies Rev. A.J. Farthing as 
the first minister, followed by Dr. Barrett.
F. Scott, a pioneer Gainesville businessman, donated a lot 
on North Dixon Street to the congregation. Mr. J.Z. Keel, a 
schoolteacher, came to Gainesville and donated $7,000 for the church to 
build a building. During the week, the building was utilized by Mr. 
Keel as a schoolhouse and by the church for worship on Sundays. First 
Christian Church has continuously existed at this location ever since.
  Rev. A.J. Bush, serving as minister, brought an organ for use during 
services, which caused a split in the congregation between 1884 through 
1886. This schism reflected the wider disagreement over the use of 
musical instruments in the church going on nationally in the Stone-
Campbell movement.
  The church has had several buildings over the years and was known as 
the Christian Church, the M.E. Church and the First Christian Church. 
The ``First Christian Church name was officially adopted in 1950. A 
clapboard church building was erected in 1878 and used by the 
congregation until it was donated to the Bethel AME Church in 1892 and 
moved to Cummins Street. A bigger building was constructed in 1892 and 
used until 1926. A brick edifice was erected in 1927 and used as a 
sanctuary until 1956 before being converted for use as a classroom wing 
and a Fellowship Hall until 1993. The current sanctuary building was 
erected in 1956 and continues to serve the congregation. The new 
Pauline Roberts Fellowship Hall and classroom wing was added to the 
property in 1993 along with a Christian Life Center in 2004. Both 
facilities are still in use by the congregation.
  The current congregation of 125 members continues to serve 
Gainesville and Cooke County with multiple outreach ministries 
including Coats for Kids, Backpack Buddies, SoulFood, Stanford House 
Activity Center for Active Seniors, VISTO and Care Corp. I join the 
members and all those who have had the privilege of being involved with 
First Christian Church in wishing them a happy anniversary and many 
more years of ministry and service to the community.
it gives me great pleasure to rise today to 
join the members and supporters of the New Haven Oratorio Choir as they 
mark the 60th Anniversary of this exceptional organization.
  The New Haven Oratorio Choir is a community-based, auditioned chamber 
choir whose mission is to provide the New Haven region with unique and 
intimate choral performances, a repertoire chosen to inspire and inform 
performers and audiences alike. Indeed, the celebration of their 60th 
Anniversary includes an upcoming performance entitled ``Blossoms, 
Beasts, and Birds: Songs About Nature which will feature selections 
from renowned composers such as Britten, Copland, Whitacre, Gibbons, 
Price, and others.
  The choir was founded in 1963 when Allen Wolbrink, the then music 
director of the Church of the Redeemer, wanted to expand its Senior 
Choir. He did so by inviting singers from the larger community to join 
with the goal of performing larger works. At the time, the New Haven 
Chorale was the only area chorus open to all singers and with a 
membership of over one hundred, it did not offer the more spiritual 
experience Mr. Wolbrink envisioned. Originally named the Redeemer 
Oratorio Choir, over the course of its history, choir members have come 
from Greater New Haven and all over the world, all finding a community 
of belonging while they lived, went to school, or worked in the area. 
In fact, former members still reflect on the feeling of community they 
still have when remembering their time with the choir.
  In 1990, the choir was officially incorporated as the New Haven 
Oratorio Choir and when the Church of the Redeemer closed, they found a 
new home just down the road at St. Thomas Episcopal Church. Today, the 
New Haven Oratorio Choir carries on the legacy of its founder, 
performing two concerts a year, each with a unique focus.
  Over its sixty-year history, there have been changes in performers, 
musical directors, and even their home base, but two features at the 
heart of the organization remain its foundation--a commitment to sacred 
music and an openness to all members of the community. As they 
celebrate this remarkable milestone, I am honored to extend my 
heartfelt congratulations to the New Haven Oratorio Choir and wish them 
all the best for many more successful years to come. As we say in 
Italian, ``Cent Anni!
Mr Speaker, I rise to recognize the Madison County 
community for its valiant and courageous spirit.
  On October 24, 2023, Madison County first responders began the 
difficult task of containing the Quaker Run fire. The following day, 
Madison County declared a local emergency after the fire continued to 
burn and eventually spread into Shenandoah National Park. As the fire 
continued to grow and weather conditions continued to work against 
first responders, it was inspiring to watch local residents and 
volunteers come together--soon, local news stations and articles began 
to highlight these efforts and the contributions made by these brave 
individuals who assisted first responders in navigating the steep and 
difficult terrain to contain the fire.
  Unreliable cellphone service added to the uncertainty. In response to 
this, Verizon provided a mobile site for emergency personnel to use to 
facilitate and coordinate communication. It also allowed the Virginia 
Department of Forestry to generate maps on site that proved useful in 
helping organize the efforts on the ground to contain the fire.
  In the face of adversity, the community came together to protect 
neighboring areas

and help Madison County in its efforts to contain the Quaker Run fire. 
Notably, volunteers--many of them local farmers and bear hunters--
helped install large containment lines to keep the fire away from the 
community and also helped distribute food and water. The collaborative 
effort between the Virginia Department of Forestry, Virginia Department 
of Emergency Management, Virginia National Guard, National Park 
Service, USDA Forest Service, local fire and emergency services, law 
enforcement, and more than 140 volunteers and nearly 20 fire and EMS 
companies is a true reflection of the caring individuals who lent their 
time and a helping hand to assist in containing the fire and keeping 
Madison County residents safe.
  On November 3, 2023, the fire had spread to roughly 1,500 acres. On 
November 9, 2023, the State of Virginia declared a state of emergency. 
Finally, on November 17, 2023, the Quaker Run fire was declared 100 
percent contained with about 3,397 acres of private, state, and federal 
lands affected by the fire. The efforts made by volunteers and first 
responders from Madison County and across the Commonwealth were crucial 
to preventing further damage and ensuring the safety of residents.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in thanking and 
celebrating the courageous men and women who came together--from 
volunteers to first responders--to help their neighbors and provide 
support to one another as they fought to contain the Quaker Run fire. 
Their unwavering commitment to helping their community during this time 
of need is a source of inspiration and I am honored to represent them 
in Congress.
today I stand with my Congressional Black 
Caucus colleagues to address the urgent challenges faced by the Black 
community in mental health during Mental Health Awareness Month and to 
call us to advocacy, awareness and action.
  While Black adults experience mental illness at similar rates to the 
general population, they face different outcomes. Between 2010 and 
2020, Black individuals saw significant increases in suicide rates. 
While the share of drug overdose deaths among majority individuals 
decreased between 2015 and 2020, shares of these deaths among Black 
people rose, accounting for their disproportionate share of drug 
overdose deaths.
  The barriers to mental wellness for Black Americans are complex. They 
include but are not limited to mental health treatment stigma, limited 
access to culturally competent care, or care at all, and the enduring 
effects of racism and racial trauma. Historical and ongoing racism 
contributes to higher poverty rates, increased incarceration, and 
limited access to healthcare and housing, as well as more subtle forms 
of discrimination like microaggressions, all of which deeply impact 
Black mental health.
  Despite comparable rates of mental health conditions, only 39 percent 
of Black individuals have received mental health services due to 
systemic barriers and stigma. Approximately 10 percent of Black people 
lack health insurance, significantly affecting their access to care, 
and when care is sought, it often occurs in emergency departments 
rather than from mental health specialists. The scarcity of Black 
professionals in the mental health field exacerbates this gap in health 
care access, understanding, and trust.
  Our response must include advocacy, awareness, and action.
  We must push for policies that dismantle systemic barriers to mental 
health care, and societal drivers of Black mental health challenges. We 
must pursue initiatives that focus on education and destigmatization so 
more Black individuals seek help without fear of judgment. And we must 
act. We must promote diversity, equity, and inclusion training in 
medical education and provider training to mitigate provider bias and 
care inequality. And we must continue to address the enduring effects 
of racism and racial trauma.
  Mental health is a right, not a privilege, and it is our duty to 
ensure that this right is upheld for every community, especially those 
that have been marginalized for far too long. Let us use National 
Mental Health and Wellness Month to commit to meaningful change. 
Together, we can foster healing, understanding, and resilience for all 
Americans.
I rise to recognize a man whose service and 
leadership have left a lasting mark on everyone hes worked with 
throughout his career. Brian Newman is the Executive Vice President and 
Chief Financial Officer of UPS, he recently announced he will depart in 
June after having served the company for five pivotal years.
  The United Parcel Service, commonly referred to as UPS, operates in 
over 200 countries and territories, with 500,000 employees globally, 
including nearly 7,000 in the state of Minnesota. Each day, 22.3 
million packages and documents make their way through the UPS network.
  Hockey players thrive under pressure, rely on their teammates, and 
appreciate the rewards of hard work, dedication, focus and discipline. 
Brian, a fellow ice hockey player and fan, embodies the hockey ethic.
  Brian began his career in 1990 as an investment banker working for 
PaineWebber in New York City. He then spent 26 years with PepsiCo and 
served in a variety of finance leadership roles spanning Europe, Asia, 
and North and South America. He also served as Executive Vice-President 
for PepsiCos Global Operations and as Chief Strategy Officer.
  During his five-year tenure as UPSs Chief Financial Officer, Brian 
navigated the company through some challenging situations. Under his 
leadership, Brian delivered results that supported employees, customers 
and communities. His list of accomplishments during just five years 
with UPS is impactful, and his leadership through the COVID-l9 pandemic 
cannot be overstated. He has left an indelible mark on UPSs people.
  Brian is an effective executive and financial expert, always ensuring 
his people, investors and shareholders understand the complexities of 
UPSs financial standing. He is a trusted advisor to his peers, a 
leader for UPS employees around the world, and a member of UPSs 
executive leadership team. Brian embodies UPSs purpose statement of 
moving our world forward by delivering what matters.
  Brian also serves on the board of Colgate-Palmolive as well as his 
alma mater, Georgetown University and Delbarton School. A native of New 
Jersey, he still considers the tri-state area his home.
  I know Brian will be missed by all who had the opportunity to work 
with him throughout his impressive career. His positive impact on UPS 
will continue to be felt for years to come. We all wish Brian, his 
wife, Lynne, and their children, Kendall, Shay, Conor and Finley, the 
best as they begin the journey ahead of them.
I rise today to recognize and honor the 
unique contributions of one of my constituents, Christopher Rhodes who 
serves as a volunteer Board Member for the local non-profit, 
Brooksville Main Street. These outstanding volunteers put in hundreds 
of hours while running their businesses and organizations. They have 
all come together for a common cause--to serve the community by 
bringing much-loved events to downtown Brooksville. Each of these board 
members have servant hearts, and their dedication and commitment to our 
community is impressive. Part of what makes our country so great is the 
willingness of ordinary Americans to go above and beyond to selflessly 
give back to others. Volunteerism is one of the cornerstones of our 
society and part of the fabric that unites us.
  It is clear that Mr. Rhodes and his fellow board members have made a 
profoundly positive impact on our community, and I am grateful for his 
service.
I rise today to recognize John Vigil for 
earning the Arvada Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth Award.
  John has overcome many challenges along his journey to success, 
demonstrating perseverance at every step. Students who strive to make 
the most of their education, like John, develop crucial skills and a 
work ethic that will guide them for the rest of their lives. This award 
is a testament to Johns hard work, determination, and perseverance at 
Jefferson Jr./Sr. High School and is clearly just the beginning of a 
bright and promising future.
  It is my honor to congratulate John Vigil on achieving the Arvada 
Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth Award.
I rise today to recognize Kyrii Petralia 
for earning the Arvada Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth Award.
  Kyrii has overcome many challenges along her journey to success, 
demonstrating perseverance at every step. Students who strive to make 
the most of their education, like Kyrii, develop crucial skills and a 
work ethic that will guide them for the rest of their lives. This award 
is a testament to Kyriis hard work, determination, and perseverance at 
The Manning School of Academics and Arts and is clearly just the 
beginning of a bright and promising future.
  It is my honor to congratulate Kyrii Petralia on achieving the Arvada 
Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth Award.
I rise today to recognize Lt. Colonel 
Theresa M. Claiborne, who was the first African American female pilot 
in the United States Air Force. Aside from her many accomplishments, 
Clairborne is flying her last commercial flight this month.
  Captain Claiborne was born on May 25, 1959, to Wayne Morris, Sr. and 
Dorothy Claiborne in Emporia, Virginia. She attended California State 
University, Sacramento, where she earned a degree in Communication, 
Culture, and Media in 1981. Claiborne completed the University of 
California-Berkeley Air Force Reserve Officer Training Corp (ROTC) 
program and was commissioned as a United States Air Force second 
lieutenant on June 20, 1981.
  Following the completion of pilot training at Laughlin Air Force Base 
in Texas, Lt. Claiborne graduated as the first African American female 
pilot in the United States Air Force on September 16, 1982. During 
Claibornes active-duty years, she rose in rank to Captain and served 
as a KC 135 pilot at Loring Air Force Base, Maine. Captain Claiborne 
credits the Tuskegee Airmen as dutiful servicemen who paved the way for 
her and the Black women and men to follow.
  After 9 years of dedicated service, Captain Claiborne retired from 
active-duty service and Joined the United States Air Force Reserves as 
a flight commander and an instructor pilot, becoming a Lieutenant 
Colonel in November 2001.
  Concurrently, after leaving active-duty service, Captain Claiborne 
Joined United Airlines as a flight engineer, working her way up to the 
rank of captain She remained one of only 15 Black female pilots at 
United Airlines until 2019.
  On January 6, 2003, Lt. Colonel Claiborne retired from the U.S. Air 
Force Reserves but maintained her position as Captain with United 
Airlines, accumulating over 15,000 civilian flying hours.
  However, Lt. Colonel Claibornes service did not stop there. In 2016, 
she co-founded the Sister of the Skies with pilots Christine Angel 
Hughes and Nia Wordlaw, with the mission of supporting and building a 
diverse aviation workforce by offering workshops, mentorships, and 
scholarships.
  We owe a debt of gratitude to Lt. Colonel Claiborne for her more than 
20 years of service to our armed forces and for paving the way for a 
new generation of Black female pilots.
I rise today to recognize William West 
for earning the Arvada Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth Award.
  William has overcome many challenges along his journey to success, 
demonstrating perseverance at every step. Students who strive to make 
the most of their education, like William, develop crucial skills and a 
work ethic that will guide them for the rest of their lives. This award 
is a testament to Williams hard work, determination, and perseverance 
at The Manning School of Academics and Arts and is clearly just the 
beginning of a bright and promising future.
  It is my honor to congratulate William West on achieving the Arvada 
Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth Award.