I am pleased to see the Opposition spokesman give me a willing eye of encouragement, for which I am duly grateful.
I start at the beginning. Clause 1 will make it much simpler to determine what law applies to an arbitration agreement. Currently, the rules for identifying the governing law are found in the common law and a recent Supreme Court decision. That decision shows both immense learning and the complexity of the current approach. The Supreme Court was split in its judgment, and its approach was different from that of the Court of Appeal, which used an approach different from that at first instance.
Instead, to make the law clearer and more predictable, clause 1 provides that the governing law will align with the legal location—that is, the seat—of the arbitration by default. This will ensure that arbitrations, where seated in England and Wales and Northern Ireland, will be fully supported by our law, which is among the most supportive of arbitration globally.
Clause 2 codifies a duty for arbitrators to disclose circumstances that may cause doubts as to their impartiality. This will codify the common law and align domestic law with international best practice, such as the United Nations Commission on International Trade Law model law, which our expert lawyers had a major hand in drafting. The model law’s influence can be found in other jurisdictions as far apart as Scotland and Switzerland. It will promote trust in arbitration by promoting trust in the integrity and impartiality of arbitrators.
Clause 3 and, in the interest of briskness, clause 4 will support arbitrators in making impartial and proper decisions by extending their immunity against liability when they resign for good reason or are removed for no fault of their own. This will support arbitrators to make robust and impartial decisions without fear.
Clause 5 clarifies the two pathways for a party that wants to challenge the jurisdiction of the arbitrators—that wants to question whether the dispute should be arbitrated at all. The party can either apply to the court for an early ruling, or it can wait until the award is issued and then go to court. Clause 5 clarifies that it cannot do both. It is either/or.
Clause 6 ensures that, where arbitrators agree that they should not be hearing a dispute after all, they can still award the costs incurred up to that point against the party that generated those costs.
Clause 7 will allow arbitrators to adopt expedited procedures to dispense with issues that have no real prospect of success. This aligns with summary judgments available in court proceedings and will make arbitrations more efficient.
We move seamlessly to clause 8, which will help emergency arbitrators. Emergency arbitrators are appointed on a temporary basis while a full tribunal is being  established—that process can sometimes take weeks. They are, therefore, very important to arbitrations. They are often tasked with vital preliminary matters, such as preserving evidence or assets, and are important to ensuring that arbitrations can proceed smoothly. As the practice of emergency arbitrators post-dates the 1996 Act, our framework did not make explicit provision for them, so looking again gives us an opportunity to examine their role.
Clause 8 empowers emergency arbitrators to handle urgent matters better and ensure compliance with their directions by equipping them with final orders and court enforcement. That will give emergency arbitrators the same pathways to enforce their orders as other arbitrators, and will enhance their effectiveness.
Clause 9 provides that court orders made in support of arbitral proceedings can be made against third parties, which aligns with the position in court proceedings. For example, it would enable a party to arbitration to get an order freezing assets held by a third party, such as a bank.
Clause 10 ensures that when a party challenges an arbitral award at court, the court has the full range of remedies available, regardless of the pathway. This clause irons out discrepancies that courts and practitioners have otherwise sought to work around.
Clause 11 provides more efficient court challenges to the tribunals jurisdiction through rules of court that would prohibit repeating evidence and arguments already debated in front of the tribunal. That will avoid such challenges becoming full re-hearings, reducing costs and delays.
I can deal with clause 12 pretty quickly, you will be pleased to know, Madam Deputy Speaker. Clause 12 ensures that the time limit for challenging awards is consistent across the Act.
Clause 13 corrects a rare example of a drafting error. What the Act meant to say was that court orders could be appealed, but in some cases there would be restrictions. What it actually said was that court orders could be appealed only where there were restrictions. To its credit, the Judicial Committee of the House of Lords spotted this error and interpreted the statute as it was meant to be read. We have taken this opportunity to correct the drafting to reflect the judicial ruling, as a useful bit of tidying up.
Clause 14 streamlines the requirements for applying to court to obtain preliminary rulings from the court on questions of law, or on whether the arbitrators have jurisdiction to hear the dispute. Early rulings, such as those from expert judges, can save time and cost.
I am getting towards the end of going through the clauses. In fact, I have come to the last and final clause that I wish to comment upon, clause 15, as you had probably worked out, Madam Deputy Speaker, because that usually comes after clause 14. [Laughter.] There is no clause 16, so clause 15 is the final clause. Clause 15 repeals provisions that were never brought into force, simply to tidy up the Act. Those provisions would have meant slight differences in approach between domestic arbitrations and international arbitrations. In the event, they were never used or needed, never brought into force and there remains no demand for them. Our  arbitration law is first class and applies equally to domestic and international arbitrations, so removing the provisions is a helpful way to tidy things up.
In sum, the Bill will greatly approve the arbitral process in our jurisdiction and further cement our position as a top global business destination, where legal disputes can be resolved fairly and quickly. The Bill has already gone through the other place, where it received considerable examination and support from noble and learned Members, including many experienced arbitrators. There are, apparently, a lot of experienced arbitrators in the other place, and they brought their knowledge, experience and expertise to the debate, for which we are very grateful.
Indeed, I emphasise that the Bill has been reviewed by Members of the other place not once, but twice. The first time, scrutiny was provided by a Committee, led by the noble and learned Lord Thomas of Cwmgiedd, that took further evidence from expert stakeholders. The several technical improvements made to the previous Bill because of that work are retained in this Bill. This time, the Bill was reviewed on the Floor of the other place, where the Government amended clause 13 to fix a long-standing error in our framework on arbitral appeals.
I have been quite thorough in covering the ground. I hope all Members feel they have got a good understanding of the issues behind the Bill and why we need to take the steps that I am urging the whole House to take.
To conclude, I second the remarks made by Lord Thomas on Third Reading:
“We must find a means of doing this very rapidly, as we must keep English law—I say English law deliberately—attractive and at the forefront of use internationally, for the benefit of our whole economy.”
—[Official Report, House of Lords,  6 November 2024 ; Vol. 840, c. 1499.]
I hope the House agrees, and will give the Bill a Second Reading.
Before this Government were elected, we said that we would change this country, and we will. To get change done, any Government have to stand on firm foundations, which is why, as we have just heard from the Chief Secretary to the Treasury, we promised to be responsible with the public’s money. We know that every penny counts in this mission, because if we fail to protect the public purse, we fail to protect the purses of the public. Family finances can never withstand fantasy economics.
That was supposed to be the whole point of the welfare cap. It was designed to help better control public spending, counting the cost of the rising price of failure. I will come to some of the failures we are now seeing and the people thrown on the scrapheap as a result of the failure of 14 years of economic policy, particularly on the labour market.
The welfare cap was intended to ensure that the cost of important parts of the social security system, such as universal credit—though not counting those actively looking for work—the personal independence payment and pension credit, remains predictable and affordable. Only the state pension and benefits for unemployed households were excluded.
What was the result of a decade of Conservative welfare caps? Repeated breaches of the cap, with ever higher limits. The latest cap is now on course to be breached by an £8.6 billion overspend. This is not tolerable, given the state of our economy and the public finances.
Worse still, there is the human cost for every single person who could be enjoying the benefits of work but has been denied the choices and chances they deserve. I regularly meet people in that position. There is the young person who has not recovered from the dreadful legacy of the pandemic—not in college, not starting their first job, barely even able to go out with friends, and bearing the burden of the mental health crisis that our young people face. I believe the pandemic generation was completely let down.
There are our older relatives who have been pushed out of work before their time with hip or knee pain. The NHS is just not able to help them at the moment, and they are not even getting advice about how to make ends meet. That is the legacy we inherited, and it is not  good enough for anybody. It is also the legacy of low growth, the higher cost of living and high inactivity, with employment and social security systems ill equipped to meet the requirements of an older, sicker nation. That is the Conservative party’s record.
Unfortunately, this breach—forecast as far back as March 2023 but ignored—is now wholly unavoidable in this fiscal year, given the scale of failure we have inherited. We will not duck the difficult decisions needed to restore economic stability, and we will deal with the failure we see before us.
Before I say how we will do that, I want to reflect on exactly how we ended up in this situation. The sad truth is that, in way too many parts of the country, too many people are denied the opportunity to have a good job so that they can support themselves and put a roof over their family’s heads.
The benefits bill only reflects that failure, with 2.8 million people locked out of the workforce due to poor health, and 3.4 million more working-age people reporting a long-term health condition than 10 years ago. We have large numbers of people turning up to a social security system that is not geared up to meet what has become the greatest unemployment challenge of a generation.
The Secretary of State was asked—
Whether she has had discussions with the Welsh Government on the potential impact of the proposed visitor levy on the economy in Wales.
Whether she has had discussions with the Welsh Government on the potential impact of the proposed visitor levy on the economy in Wales.
Whether she has had discussions with the Welsh Government on the potential impact of the proposed visitor levy on the economy in Wales.
Ahead of the opening game of this year’s Six Nations in Paris on Friday evening, I know Members right across the House will want to join me in wishing the Wales team good luck in their campaign.
Wales has joined a long list of other countries that have introduced a visitor levy, including Germany, Spain and France. The Welsh Government’s Bill will enable local authorities to decide whether to implement a small levy locally. The money raised will be used to invest in Wales’s thriving tourist sector, and develop and maintain attractions for residents and visitors alike.
Hospitality businesses in my constituency of Bridlington and The Wolds are rightly concerned about Labour’s plans for a tourist tax in Wales, so will the Secretary of State confirm to the House today whether it is her Government’s policy to roll out such a tax across the United Kingdom?
As the hon. Member may know, tourism is devolved, and we work closely with the devolved Governments. The Department for Culture, Media and Sport—my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State for that Department is here—will carefully monitor the proposal by the Welsh Government. There are currently no plans to introduce a similar tax in England.
I welcome the Government’s ambition to welcome 50 million visitors per year to the UK by 2030, but does the Secretary of State share my concern that a visitor levy, combined with ever more expensive electronic travel authorisations, will make it much more expensive for people to visit Wales, and indeed my constituency of Mid Bedfordshire, starving hard-working people of income at a time when they have to pay Labour’s jobs tax?
As far as I am aware, Mid Bedfordshire is not in Wales. The hon. Member raises objections to the Welsh Government’s policy, but he should perhaps check his own ranks first, because Conservative-run Great Yarmouth borough council has supported a form of tourist levy for years.
Like many of my constituents in Romford, I have always enjoyed visiting Wales. However, for many, this visitor levy will be a step too far; it is bound to deter tourism to the Principality. Does the Secretary of State agree with me that we should be encouraging and championing British domestic tourism, not inhibiting it?
There are a number of assumptions in the hon. Member’s question. As I say, more than 40 countries and holiday destinations around the world have introduced a form of visitor levy, and many of us have paid levies when visiting other countries. As I say, one of the Conservatives’ own councils is championing a tourist levy. They need to do their research better.
What recent discussions she has had with Cabinet colleagues on increasing economic growth in Wales.
Economic growth is the No. 1 priority for this Government. Our new industrial strategy and national wealth fund will boost economic growth, create jobs and drive up living standards across Wales. Working alongside ministerial colleagues, I was pleased to confirm £320 million of funding for the two investment zones in Wales, and to give the green light for Welsh freeports. Together, these will unlock billions in private investment and create over 20,000 jobs in our ports and communities.
I, too, wish Wales luck in the Six Nations, but I wish Scotland more luck. Scotland, like Wales, is set to benefit from significant tax incentives and investment, under the UK Government’s freeports scheme. Does the Secretary of State agree that the scheme offers an excellent opportunity for economic growth?
I thank my hon. Friend for his question, and I wholeheartedly agree with him. The freeports programme will deliver economic growth and jobs across Wales. Anglesey freeport’s tax sites have gone live, which is excellent news. The freeport aims to attract over £1 billion of investment into the green energy sector and to create nearly 5,000 jobs by 2030. The Celtic freeport is set to attract £8.4 billion of private and public investment, and to deliver 11,500 jobs.
Given the significance of trade relationships between Northern Ireland and Wales, particularly in agriculture and textiles, can we ensure that any economic prosperity for Wales is beneficial for Northern Ireland as well?
The hon. Gentleman may have heard the Chancellor’s speech this morning. Our No. 1 priority is economic growth right across all four nations of the United Kingdom.
I call the Chair of the Welsh Affairs Committee.
I welcome the recent announcement on the creation of artificial intelligence growth zones across the UK, which will turbocharge growth and boost living standards. As part of that AI development, Vantage Data Centres has plans to invest over £12 billion across the UK, creating at least 11,000 jobs, including in my constituency. Will the Secretary of State speak to her colleagues around the Cabinet table and work with me and others to develop an AI growth zone for south Wales to secure the economic growth that we so desperately need?
I am glad that my hon. Friend raised that. She will know that the Government are fully committed to harnessing AI to improve productivity and efficiency, and to boost economic growth. I was pleased to hear the Chancellor talking about AI growth zones in her speech. Like my hon. Friend, I want to ensure that Wales maximises AI opportunities. I will be happy to discuss that further with her.
One of the advantages of this great United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland is that every region benefits from the trading opportunities that arise. Will the Secretary of State reaffirm that there are advantages for Northern Ireland from its economic contact with Wales, as there are for Scotland and England?
As I said, the Government are determined to see growth right across the United Kingdom, in all four nations. The relationship between Wales and Northern Ireland is very strong, and long may that continue.
I call the Liberal Democrat spokesperson.
Wales is in dire need of economic growth, as we have some of the lowest wages in the United Kingdom and areas with the highest levels of poverty. Does the Secretary of State agree that banking hubs can be part of the solution? Will she support my campaign for a banking hub in Ystradgynlais, the largest town in my constituency? The banks closed and left town several years ago, so local residents and businesses face long trips to access cash.
I know Ystradgynlais well, and would be happy to meet the hon. Member to discuss a banking hub. He will know that we have seen the decimation of high-street banks over the last 14 years. Banking hubs are a crucial element in keeping a community together, and in ensuring its access to cash.
We have heard this week that it is growth for Heathrow but decline for Welsh universities. Cardiff University in the Secretary of State’s home city is axing 400 full-time jobs due to a funding crisis, with nursing, music and modern language degrees on the chopping block. This is an education disaster playing out in real time. Will the Government scrap their national insurance hikes to ease the strain on universities?
The potential job losses at Cardiff University are deeply concerning and will come as a significant blow to university staff and their families. I hope that there will be sufficient volunteers for a voluntary redundancy programme, so that we avoid compulsory redundancies, and that support will be provided to those impacted. The right hon. Lady will know that the last 14 years of Conservative policies have seen the university sector decimated across the United Kingdom.
On Conservative policies, the Secretary of State will know that universities are also being hammered by Brexit. The number of EU students starting full-time undergraduate courses in the UK fell by 68% between 2020 and 2024 to the lowest level in 30 years. Surely she agrees that our rejoining the single market would help universities to attract more students, as well as boosting economic growth.
This Government have made economic growth their No. 1 mission. The Prime Minister is leading from the front in resetting the UK’s relationship with the EU. However, the right hon. Lady’s question highlights the stark risks associated with separatism. Those risks are why I will always be a strong and passionate advocate for a Wales that thrives as part of the United Kingdom.
What steps she is taking with Cabinet colleagues to help support crime prevention in Wales.
Our plan for change will put an extra 13,000 police officers, police community support officers and special constables on our streets across the UK, including in Wales. In December, I opened a brand-new base for Gwent police in Abergavenny, so that officers can better serve the town and restore the visible, accessible policing that our communities deserve.
In Monmouthshire, domestic abuse victims and survivors tell me that their voices still are not heard by the police. They stress the need for those on the ground to be better trained in early intervention, which can prevent escalation and reduce violent behaviour and domestic abuse overall. What steps can be taken with colleagues across Government, and Welsh Government colleagues, to better embed domestic abuse prevention?
My hon. Friend will know that the Prime Minister’s plan for change reinforced our manifesto ambition to halve violence against women and girls in a decade. We will do everything in our power to achieve that. We will put specialist rape and sexual offences  teams in every police force in Wales, and early this year we will start the process of introducing domestic abuse experts into 999 control rooms, so that victims can talk directly to a specialist for the advice and support that they need and deserve.
Rural crime is a scourge across the entirety of the United Kingdom. What discussions has the Secretary of State had with her Cabinet colleagues on ensuring a consistent approach to tackling rural crime across the UK?
We were elected on a manifesto that included a mission for safer streets across every nation of the United Kingdom. We will put police back on the beat, ensure there is a named officer for every neighbourhood, and provide 13,000 additional officers, police community support officers and special constables in neighbourhood roles in England and Wales. The provisional police funding settlement has been increased this year by up to £1 billion.
I call the shadow Secretary of State.
An ITV Wales investigation last year discovered 28 prevention of future death reports over a 16-month period relating to the north Wales Betsi Cadwaladr University Health Board. The Welsh Secretary’s predecessor called for an inquiry into these tragedies. Meanwhile, answers are rightly being sought, as there is clear evidence of grooming gangs sexually exploiting young children in Wales. Will the Secretary of State commit to building on her predecessor’s actions, and push the Welsh Government to use the Inquiries Act 2005 to launch two vital Wales-wide inquiries, to give victims and their loved ones justice?
The hon. Lady will be aware that, unlike the previous Government, we are determined to give the victims of child sexual exploitation the long-overdue justice that they deserve by enacting the recommendations of the Jay review. On  16 January , the Home Secretary announced that victims will be given more power to have their cases re-examined. We have also unveiled a rapid national audit, to be led by Baroness Louise Casey, to uncover the scale and profile, including ethnicity, of group-based offending in the UK today.
It is clear from the Secretary of State’s weak response that the Labour party has a woman problem and a justice problem. In a Nation Cymru report, a survivor said that she believes the abuse is still happening, and that young victims are not getting the help they need. A refusal to create a process for listening to victims in Wales and holding inquiries means that justice will not prevail and communities remain at risk. This House will be as concerned as I am about the number of domestic abuse cases in south Wales increasing last year; there were almost 18,000 victims. What steps is she taking directly to support victims and survivors?
That is a bit rich coming from the hon. Lady. Previous Conservative Governments—her Governments—decimated the Ministry of Justice budget. Crown court delays, victims waiting years for Crown  court trials—that all happened under their watch. We are protecting women and girls in Wales, where the Tories failed to do so.
What recent discussions she has had with the Welsh Government on NHS reform in Wales.
The Budget provided the Welsh Government with an additional £1.7 billion to invest in public services, such as the NHS. The Welsh Government announced £157 million of funding for the NHS in Wales this year, and more than £600 million extra in their draft budget to fund health and social care and drive down waiting lists.
The Labour party has been running the NHS for 25 years in Wales, where waiting lists are through the roof, compared with those in England. Does the Secretary of State agree with Mr Mark Drakeford that what Wales really needs is fewer hospitals?
The Welsh Government have no plans to close any hospitals. I will not be taking any lectures from the Conservatives, with their fictitious plan to build 40 new hospitals in England. The hospitals do not exist; the money did not exist—they are not happening.
Will the Secretary of State outline how she and her colleagues are working with the Welsh Government to improve health outcomes for people in Wales?
We are working in a spirit of genuine collaboration with the Welsh Government to do everything possible to cut waiting lists and build an NHS fit for the future in both England and Wales—a marked change from previous UK Governments, who were obstructive and hostile to the Welsh Government. We are sharing best practice, and the Welsh Government have established a ministerial advisory group to plan NHS reforms that will improve performance and reduce waiting lists. The group will draw on expertise from the NHS in both Wales and England.
I call the shadow Secretary of State.
Labour has been running the NHS badly in Wales since Tony Blair was Prime Minister, with waiting times constantly at record levels ever since. The Government cannot just devolve and forget—the people of Wales need to see and feel proactivity from the Wales Office.
Everybody knows somebody waiting in pain in Wales. Last week, on “Any Questions?”, the First Minister spoke without much detail of an injection of money that will bring down waiting lists. Can the Secretary of State explain if there is a plan, or if it is just another blank piece of paper?
The £600 million that the Welsh Government are to invest in the Welsh NHS can happen only if the hon. Lady’s colleagues in the Senedd vote for the budget. If they do not vote for it, the money will not happen.
What steps she is taking to strengthen the Union.
Through our new Council of Nations and Regions and regular engagement between the Secretary of State and the First Minister, our two Governments are collaborating more closely than ever before. This means that we can deliver for Wales in new ways—on the NHS and on rail—as well as creating new job opportunities by delivering freeports, establishing investment zones and developing our industrial strategy to attract investment in critical areas such as offshore wind.
Does the Minister agree that the close collaboration by the UK and Welsh Governments to deliver the industrial strategy is an essential element of this Government’s plans to deliver strong economic growth throughout the UK, and will she explain how this joint working by both Governments will help Welsh industry? Does she further agree that the SNP Government in Scotland should take a similar approach to reap the full benefits of our great partnership of nations, which was so badly undermined by the reckless actions of the previous Government?
I do indeed agree. The SNP could learn a thing or two from our collaborative approach to securing economic growth in Wales. Our new industrial strategy is central to our growth mission and our plan for change. The Secretary of State has established an innovative economic advisory group to enable the UK and Welsh Governments, business leaders, trade unions and experts to work together to pursue opportunities for growth and jobs, and to attract investment.
Further to that answer, I see from recent press coverage that the SNP Government are once again banging on about another independence referendum, despite the Supreme Court’s ruling. Will the Government make it crystal clear to devolved Governments that they do not have the power to arbitrarily instigate independence referendums?
I can confirm that the hon. Gentleman is absolutely right.
What steps she is taking with Cabinet colleagues to help create new jobs in Wales.
What steps she is taking with Cabinet colleagues to help create new jobs in Wales.
Since July, we have driven over £1 billion of private investment from Eren Holding and Kellogg’s into Wales, creating and sustaining over 400 well-paid jobs in manufacturing. Our Welsh freeports and investment zones will together unlock billions in private investment and aim to create at least 20,000 jobs across all four corners of Wales.
I welcome the news that the Secretary of State has signed a memorandum of understanding on four Welsh growth deals with Cabinet Secretary for Economy, Rebecca Evans. Will the Minister outline how this UK-Welsh Government partnership will deliver the well-paid jobs and economic growth needed in areas like Montgomeryshire and Glyndŵr?
The memorandum of understanding signed recently between the UK and Welsh Governments further demonstrates our commitment to working together to deliver economic growth throughout Wales. The UK Government have invested £790 million in Wales’s growth deals, including £110 million in the Mid Wales growth deal which aims to leverage up to £400 million of public and private sector investment in the region and create up to 1,400 additional jobs.
In places across the UK, including in my constituency of Wrexham, for too long too many young people have fallen through the gaps, meaning that they can miss out on job opportunities, education and gaining the critical skills essential to getting on in life. What measures is the Minister taking to ensure that young people can seize the opportunities of our growth mission and are not left behind, and help them to maximise their potential?
Today, my right hon. Friend the Chancellor confirmed that we are moving forward with the £160 million Wrexham and Flintshire investment zone, focusing on the area’s strengths in advanced manufacturing, leveraging £1 billion of private investment over the next 10 years and creating up to 6,000 jobs. Growth is integral to creating the opportunities that young people need to get on in life.
Whether she has had recent discussions with the Welsh Government on plans to ban greyhound racing in Wales.
Labour has long been committed to animal welfare. Indeed, it was my privilege under the previous Labour Government to serve on the Committee for the Bill that became the Animal Welfare Act 2006. In our 2024 manifesto, we committed to further improve animal welfare, including ending puppy smuggling. This particular issue is devolved to the Welsh Government.
I thank the Minister for her response. I am incredibly passionate about animal welfare—I have a dog and a cat—and for the most part we are an animal-loving country. That is why I find it so shocking that we still have practices such as greyhound racing that treat animals as disposable. If they do not run fast enough or if they get injured, they get binned off. Some of them are still spending 80% of their life in kennels. Will the Minister meet me to discuss this issue further?
I would be happy to meet my hon. Friend.
What discussions she has had with the Secretary of State for Energy Security and Net Zero on meeting net zero targets in Wales.
I am working with the Secretary of State for Energy Security and Net Zero to ensure that Wales plays a leading role in reaching our net zero targets and clean power by 2030. By supporting floating offshore wind, onshore wind, hydrogen, nuclear, tidal and carbon capture, we are seizing the unique economic opportunity of net zero to boost growth and create jobs across Wales.
On floating offshore wind in the Celtic sea, the Secretary of State said:
“Floating offshore wind represents a golden opportunity”
not just for meeting net zero targets but
“for lower energy bills, new jobs and the industries of the future”.
Do the Government think that the opportunities from offshore wind can extend from the Celtic sea into Cornwall and Devon, too?
The economic opportunities of floating offshore wind are significant, and, obviously, the Celtic sea is a big area off parts of both England and Wales. We are working closely to seize those economic opportunities to deliver jobs and growth, and we want to see economic growth and jobs throughout the United Kingdom.
The Prime Minister was asked—
If he will list his official engagements for Wednesday 29 January.
Communities across the United Kingdom have been hit hard by Storm Éowyn. I spoke to the leaders of the devolved Administrations in Scotland and Northern Ireland over the weekend to discuss working with them on the support that is required, and to pay tribute to all those responding on the frontline.
Kick-starting economic growth is the No. 1 mission of this Government. It will put more money in people’s pockets and will deliver on our plan for change. Today the Chancellor announced our next steps to deliver that plan: a new Oxford-Cambridge corridor, redeveloping Old Trafford, and supporting a new runway at Heathrow. We are removing the barriers to investment, supporting innovation, and going further and faster to boost growth.
This morning I had meetings with ministerial colleagues and others. In addition to my duties in the House, I shall have further such meetings later today.
This April the state pension will increase by £470 a year, and over the course of this Parliament it will increase by up to £1,900, benefiting millions of  pensioners. Does the Prime Minister agree that means-testing the state pension would do severe harm, and will he confirm that this Government will always protect the state pension and the triple lock?
Let me be absolutely clear: there will be no means-testing of the state pension under this Labour Government. We are committed both to the triple lock and to the principle that people should receive pensions based on their contribution, regardless of their wealth. My hon. Friend is right: 12 million pensioners will receive a £470 increase in April. When people such as the Leader of the Opposition say that they want means-testing, that means a cut. The difference between us is that they would cut pensions and we are increasing them.
I call the Leader of the Opposition.
May I take this opportunity to solemnly commemorate the 80th anniversary of the liberation of Auschwitz? We remember the 6 million Jewish men, women and children who were murdered. The Holocaust stands as a unique evil in human history.
Yesterday the Prime Minister set his growth test. He said that if a policy is
“good for growth…the answer is ‘yes’, if it’s not then the answer is ‘no’.”
This morning the Chancellor embraced a series of Conservative policies. Although many are welcomed, they will take years to deliver. When the Conservatives left office, we had the fastest economic growth in the G7, but what are the Government doing for growth now? They are destroying it. Let us look at the employment Bill. The Government’s own figures say it will cost business £5 billion a year. It clearly fails the Prime Minister’s growth test. Will he drop it?
I think the proposition that the Conservatives left a golden inheritance was tested on  4 July , which is why they are standing over there.
The Leader of the Opposition asked what we are doing. The Office for National Statistics says that we have the highest investment for 19 years. PwC says that this is the second-best place to invest in the world. The International Monetary Fund has upgraded our growth, predicting that the UK will be the fastest-growing major economy in Europe. Wages are up and inflation is down. However, there is more to do. We are reforming planning and regulation, building the new homes that we need, and supporting a third runway at Heathrow. As the Leader of the Opposition admitted to the CBI in November,
“there is no point in me just complaining about Labour when it was obvious that we Conservatives lost the confidence of business.”
We are not taking lectures from them.
The Prime Minister does not want to talk about the employment Bill because he does not know about it. Last week he misled the House. He was not on top of his own Education Bill—
Order. We cannot accuse the Prime Minister of misleading the House. [Interruption.] We cannot do it. I am sure there are words that the Leader of the Opposition would prefer to use.
Last week, the Prime Minister claimed to have laid down an amendment that he had not made. He does not know what is going on in here or out there. Last week, I spoke to a woman running a business in Exeter. She is terrified of taking on new staff. She is struggling to keep her head above water, dreading what this Government will do next. She is not alone. The Federation of Small Businesses says 92% of small employers are concerned about the employment Bill. Clauses 1 to 6 make it harder for businesses to hire new employees—often young people looking for their first job. This is not an employment Bill; it is an unemployment Bill. Given these clauses, will he drop his Bill and show that he is not anti-growth?
We believe in giving people proper dignity and protection at work. That is why we are proud of our record on supporting workers. The Conservatives consistently vote against any protection for working people, and the Leader of the Opposition’s consistent refrain is that there should be less, but we are driving growth on behalf of working people. Good work rights are consistent with growth—every good business knows that. On top of planning reform, the building of houses and supporting aviation, the Chancellor this morning spoke of the Oxford-Cambridge growth corridor, redeveloping Old Trafford, and manufacturing at East Midlands airport. We want to grow the economy; the only policy the Leader of the Opposition has got is to shrink pensions.
All the Prime Minister’s ideas are the ones that we thought up. He needs to make sure that we deliver growth now, as well as in the future. To grow our economy, we must get more people off sickness and welfare, and into work. Clauses 8 and 9 of the unemployment Bill take us in the opposite direction by increasing entitlements. The Government themselves—his Government—estimate that these changes will increase business costs from £600 million to £1 billion a year in sick pay. That will mean higher prices, fewer jobs and less growth. Will he drop these measures from the Bill?
No. I think they are good for workers and good for growth. This is the same argument that the Conservatives made against the minimum wage and every protection for workers. The Leader of the Opposition says that they are their ideas. She says she supports a third runway at Heathrow. Her shadow Transport Secretary says that it would be “calamitous”. The shadow Business Secretary is busy writing letters opposing airport expansion in his own back yard. The shadow Chief Secretary to the Treasury says the Oxford-Cambridge idea is “flawed” and he is against it. We are the coalition of builders; they are the coalition of blockers.
The Prime Minister forgets that his own Chancellor blocked an airport in her constituency. They are hypocrites.
Let us talk about the employment Bill. Part 1 of the Bill means that a new employee could start a job in the morning and take their employer to a tribunal that afternoon. It is no wonder that this Bill has been called an “adventure playground for lawyers”. This Bill is terrible for business, but it is great employment for lawyers. I know the Prime Minister loves the legal profession, but he needs to stop being a lawyer and start  being a leader. This is another measure in the Bill that fails his growth test. Will he show some leadership and drop it?
I understand that the Leader of the Opposition likes straight talking: she is talking absolute nonsense. She knows, and anybody who understands anything about the Bill or any employment law will know, that you cannot start in the morning and go to a tribunal in the afternoon. We know she is not a lawyer, she is clearly not a leader, and if she keeps on like this, she is going to be the next lettuce.
The Prime Minister does not know what his Bill is doing. He should listen to business, which is terrified of this Bill. The only workers he cares about are lawyers, but it is not just lawyers benefiting from this Bill. Who else benefits? It is not taxpayers; they will be paying for even more welfare. It is not young workers; they will not get their first break. It is definitely not businesses; they are being hammered with yet more burdens. Who benefits? It is the trade unions. Part 4 of the unemployment Bill—[Interruption.] Labour Members have not read it. Part 4 of the unemployment Bill is the biggest expansion of trade union powers for a generation—[Interruption.] Exactly; thank you. The public will have heard them cheer. Rather than deregulating for business, which creates growth, he is deregulating for the unions. Clause 61 alone reduces the notice period for strikes to just one week. Given that strikes are catastrophic for growth, will he drop part 4 of the Bill?
It is good for working people, and it is good for the economy. The right hon. Lady should keep up: the CBI has welcomed our positive steps this morning. The Chancellor has given a brilliant speech on the economy, fixing the mess the Conservatives left and growing our economy, and the CBI has said it celebrates this
“positive leadership and a clear vision to kickstart the economy”.
That is the difference. We are growing the economy; the Conservatives left it in a complete mess.
The arrogance of the Prime Minister is that he thinks that it is his Government who create growth. He is wrong. It is business that creates growth. Our economy is built by entrepreneurs, risk-takers and the hard graft of working people. They know that you cannot tax your way to growth, you cannot borrow your way to growth, you cannot legislate your way to growth. Other countries are serious about freeing business from red tape. President Trump is doing it in America. Argentina is taking a chainsaw to regulations. Even the EU is not going as far as this left-wing Government. This Bill will put us at the bottom of the pack. Added to the jobs tax and the family business tax, it is no wonder that wealth creators are fleeing Britain in droves. The Chancellor is desperately trying to save her reputation. She knows Labour has damaged growth. This Bill manifestly fails the Prime Minister’s own growth test. If he will not drop the unemployment Bill, what is the point of his growth test?
The right hon. Lady has got a nerve. The Conservatives broke the economy and completely destroyed it. They broke the health service and completely destroyed it. They ruined the prisons and everything  else you can mention. They failed on every front. They are in no position to give us lectures on anything. She says that she accepts they failed and they are changing, but they have learned absolutely nothing.
I welcome the Government’s action last week to tackle rogue traders who install faulty home insulation, affecting many of my constituents. Does the Prime Minister agree that Labour’s warm homes plan will tackle fuel poverty and bring down bills for families as part of our plan for change?
The Conservatives have a lot to answer for in the failing system that they left behind. We have taken immediate action to ensure that consumers insulating their homes are not let down again. We are investing £3.4 billion in our warm homes plan to upgrade 5 million homes.
I call the leader of the Liberal Democrats.
I take this opportunity to thank the Holocaust Memorial Day Trust for all its work in commemorating the 80th anniversary of the liberation of Auschwitz, and to say what a privilege it was to meet Holocaust survivors at the Guildhall event.
When my hon. Friend  the Member for North Devon (Ian Roome)  and I recently visited a hospital in Barnstaple, a surgeon there told us that it was like a ticking time bomb. He explained that a hospital of that size needs 12 operating theatres to meet demand; it has just four. The last Conservative Government promised to rebuild it, but we all know that that was a hollow promise. Now the North Devon district hospital is one of nine across the country whose urgent rebuild programme has been postponed for over 10 years. Will the Prime Minister meet hon. Members whose constituents’ lives being are harmed by this delay, to see if there is any way we can bring these urgent projects forward?
I join the right hon. Gentleman in his comments about the Holocaust survivors that we met earlier this week. It was incredibly moving, as it always is, and I was struck by the fact that there were so many in the gathering. We are unlikely to see so many in one place like that again. We must never, ever forget.
On the question of hospitals, I think people across the country are right to feel angry, betrayed and frustrated at the last Government’s plan, or non-plan, for hospitals. It was unachievable. It was unfunded. It was empty promises. Under them, these hospitals would never have been built. Our funded plan, backed by the investment we have put in, will deliver them. We will take such steps as we can on hubs etc, to advance quickly on waiting lists and operations, and I am more than happy to make sure that all constituents and Members can meet the relevant Ministers.
Last week, the Prime Minister told me that it would be three years before social care reforms can be implemented. Now he is saying that urgent hospital rebuilds will take more than a decade. My hon. Friends and I will keep coming back to this issue.
The Chancellor has now admitted that we need to go further and faster in the pursuit of economic growth, and we agree, but the Prime Minister knows that we believe that means setting aside his objections to a UK-EU customs union so that our country can go further and faster in rebuilding our trading relationships with our European neighbours, especially with the threat to world trade posed by Trump’s tariffs and trade wars. If the Prime Minister will not change his mind today on a customs union, will he confirm to the House that when he goes to Brussels on Monday he will open negotiations for the UK to join the pan-Euro-Mediterranean convention so that we can start removing the growth-damaging trade barriers set up by the Conservatives?
Our No. 1 mission is growth, which is why have we set out all the initiatives over the past seven months, particularly the ones this morning. The right hon. Gentleman knows that in relation to the reset with the EU, which we are determined to achieve, we have clear red lines when it comes to the single market and the customs union. He knows where we stand on that.
Today’s Joseph Rowntree Foundation report on UK poverty highlights not only who is most likely to be poor but the scale and increase in deep and enduring poverty. I was encouraged by the Prime Minister’s response to me at the Liaison Committee before Christmas, when he explained and acknowledged that disabled people experience poverty because of their extra costs and that, while more than 2 million disabled people can and want to work, many others cannot and should receive adequate support. Many vulnerable claimants are worried following speculation that the £3 billion of savings to be found from the social security budget may impact on their disability benefits. Does my right hon. and learned Friend agree that language matters and that their concerns must be heard?
I thank my hon. Friend for raising this. I know she is deeply concerned about this issue and campaigns on it. The rise in poverty caused by the mismanagement of the economy by the Conservative party is unacceptable. Our approach to social security will ensure that work is accessible to as many people as possible, as a route out of poverty. That includes the new Connect to Work programme, which is expected to help 100,000 disabled people find and stay in work.
I thank the Prime Minister and the Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster for their sterling support for Northern Ireland over the past few days in the aftermath of Storm Éowyn, which is greatly appreciated and demonstrates how well the Union works.
On  15 August 1998 , the fragile peace in Northern Ireland was shattered when the Real IRA detonated a bomb in Omagh town. Twenty-nine people died, and two unborn twins never saw this world. Through the dignity and the stoic campaigning of Michael Gallagher, whose son Aiden died, a public inquiry was secured through the courts, which recommended in 2021 that the Irish Government should similarly hold an inquiry  to understand what could have been prevented, given the cross-border nature of the atrocity—the bomb was prepared in and transported from the Irish Republic. Will the Prime Minister use his good offices to ensure that truth is delivered and justice arrives for the families of those who so needlessly lost their lives to Irish republican terrorism?
First, I assure the right hon. Gentleman that we will continue to work with the leaders in Northern Ireland to ensure that we deal with the storm, which has been devastating for very many people who are still without power and who have all the associated problems.
I thank the right hon. Gentleman for raising the Omagh bombing inquiry. It was a heinous and cowardly terrorist attack, and it shocked the world. Our thoughts are with the family members who are taking part in commemorative hearings this week. I welcome the Irish Government’s commitment to co-operating with the inquiry. The Secretary of State for Northern Ireland has raised with the Irish Government the importance of working together on addressing these and all legacy issues, and I am grateful to the right hon. Gentleman for raising this very serious and important issue.
The Ipswich northern bypass is a project of local, regional and national importance, and on which the future of our town and county hinges. However, this critical project has been gathering dust for years, repeatedly blocked by people who refuse to act in our long-term interests. The Prime Minister has set out how our Government will back the builders over the blockers, so will he now back the builders in my town and make this a project of national significance through our plan for change?
My hon. Friend has been relentless in seeking to boost growth and investment in Ipswich and Suffolk. The gridlock his constituents face underlines the failure of the Conservatives to deal with that when they had the chance to do so. We will fast track decisions on at least 150 major economic infrastructure projects to kick-start growth, and I will ensure that my hon. Friend gets a meeting with the relevant Minister to discuss the issues of concern to him.
As my right hon. Friend the Member for Kingston and Surbiton (Ed Davey) said earlier, last week North Devon district hospital got the devastating news that investment would be delayed for 10 years, beyond 2035. In the five years since the last Government’s empty promises, our hospital’s maintenance backlog has grown to over £40 million. Given that £200 million has reportedly been spent just on consultancy fees for the new hospital programme, what funding for extra maintenance will be available for those hospitals that now face another decade of waiting?
I thank the hon. Gentleman for raising the issue. His constituents will be angry and frustrated at the empty, unfunded promises left by the Conservatives. Let us be clear, under their non-plan, North Devon district hospital would simply not have been delivered—it was not just delayed; it was never going to be delivered. Conservative Members know  that, the hon. Gentleman knows that and his constituents know that. We have put in place a funded, deliverable plan that will see the hospital built, and we will work closely with the trust to accelerate work. The Conservative party owes his constituents an apology.
Children in Ealing Southall will be sleeping on sofas and living room floors tonight because of 14 years of failure by the Conservatives. Ealing council has joined over 100 councils that are trying to remove the barriers and give those kids a decent home to live in—something Conservative Members do not seem to care about. As part of the Government’s plan for change, will the Prime Minister look at the five solutions put forward by those councils, so that we can secure the future of council housing for those children sleeping on the floor tonight?
My hon. Friend is right to raise that very serious issue. We are committed to working with every council to deliver the biggest increase in social and affordable housing in a generation. We are immediately taking action to reform the right to buy and to enable councils to borrow more cheaply, and investing in the affordable homes programme.
I entered active politics after an attack in my home was misused by others to promote an anti-European Union and anti-immigrant agenda. My life was saved by two brave police officers from Wimbledon police station. As a family, our lives were transformed by a restorative justice session organised by the charity Why Me?, where we met one of my four attackers in prison. Will the Prime Minister meet me to discuss how his Government can give restorative justice greater emphasis, put victims at the centre of the criminal justice system, reduce recidivism, and cut crime and costs?
I extend my sympathy for what the hon. Member experienced—it must have had a profound impact on him and his family. I, too, have seen the power of restorative justice, which enables victims to receive answers and perpetrators to face the human costs of their crimes. Under the victims’ code, all adult victims must be told about restorative justice and how to access it. We can always do more and I will ensure that he gets the meeting that he wants with the relevant Minister.
I am pleased to announce that this summer I will be going on paternity leave again for baby No. 2. May I congratulate the Secretary of State for Scotland on his new arrival? The Chancellor spoke brilliantly this morning about growth, and I am pleased to reveal that new research from the Joseph Rowntree Foundation shows that by increasing paternity leave, we could increase economic growth by £2.6 billion a year. Will the Prime Minister review statutory paternity leave? From one father to another, will he meet me and The Dad Shift to discuss how we can support new parents?
I wish my hon. Friend and his wife well with their new arrival. We are conducting a review into parental leave, because we cannot grow the  economy if parents have to choose between work and their children. Thanks to the Employment Rights Bill, which the Conservatives oppose, 30,000 more fathers will get paternity leave. That is the difference: the Leader of the Opposition wants to roll back parental rights; we are extending them.
Since 2012, the Drax power station has been given £7 billion of green subsidies by the Government for burning 27 million trees per year. That is enough money for five years of pensioners’ winter fuel payments. While Ofgem has been asleep at the wheel, a recent KPMG report has concluded that Drax claimed those subsidies illegally. Will the Prime Minister demand to see that KPMG report before giving another pound of taxpayers’ money to Drax?
I thank the hon. Lady for raising this important issue. Of course we will look at the report, but I do not join in her description—we will look at the report.
As you well know, Mr Speaker, Lancashire is a wonderful county, full of great businesses and hard-working people, yet for too long we have been held back by an outdated two-tier council system. The Government’s English devolution Bill is a massive opportunity for us to get back in the fast lane and catch up with the likes of Manchester and Liverpool. Will the Prime Minister join me in calling on all Lancashire leaders to work together in the interests of our residents, putting aside political differences and self-interests, and move forward in good faith to unleash Lancashire’s huge potential?
My hon. Friend has given decades of service to his community. I am a firm believer in moving power out of Westminster and into the hands of those with skin in the game. That is how we boost growth, create opportunities and drive reform. I am pleased that we are establishing a combined county authority in Lancashire. Our ambition is for mayors across all areas of England who can take advantage of the powers set out in the devolution White Paper, including in Lancashire.
I declare an interest as a governor of the Royal Berkshire hospital, and a family member has shares in a medical company. In the Public Gallery today are patients who use the Royal Berkshire hospital. Parts of its estate are crumbling as we speak and it urgently needs a rebuild, but we will have to wait until at least 2037. Can the Prime Minister please explain to those visitors and to the House why he thinks it is acceptable that staff and patients will have to dodge buckets collecting rainwater from leaking roofs for another 18 years? Will he meet them and explain that to them face to face?
I am grateful to the hon. Gentleman for raising this matter on behalf of his constituents, so I will speak and his constituents will hear the answer. There was not a plan for the building. It was a pretend plan; it was a fiction. It was unfunded and undeliverable. It only existed in the head of Boris Johnson. There is the frustration for his constituents and I really understand  it. They thought—because they were promised—that they were going to get something, which the Conservative party knew was never going to be delivered. That is absolutely unforgiveable. We will pick that up. We have put in place a funded scheme to build as quickly as we can, but it has to be funded and it has to be deliverable. That is the difference between the approach that we are taking and the approach that they took. Of course I will ensure that a relevant Minister meets the hon. Gentleman and his constituents to explain that more fully to them.
In China, DeepSeek has developed an artificial intelligence model almost as good as the most advanced technology from OpenAI. In the US, they are investing up to $500 billion in building out data centres. To build data centres, we need two things: lots of energy and, ideally, cold weather. Fortunately, Scotland has both of those in abundance. Will the Prime Minister back Glasgow being an AI growth zone, to help bring investment and solidify the UK’s place as the third largest AI market on earth?
What a contrast to the SNP: a strong Labour voice championing economic growth in Scotland. The AI developments this week show why we are right to put artificial intelligence at the heart of our plan for change. We have already secured £39 billion of AI investment, which will create 13,000 jobs across the UK. I agree with my hon. Friend that Scotland has real potential for AI growth zones. I will make sure that he can meet the relevant Minister to discuss that.
In my  constituency of Horsham, my local council faces a tax bill of half a million pounds from the rise in national insurance, and my local hospice, St Catherine’s, has had to mothball a brand-new ward. What message does the Prime Minister have for all the public services that are outright losers at the hands of the very tax that is supposed to save them?
I am grateful to the hon. Member for raising this matter. As he knows, local councils received an increase in their settlement this year, so they have more money to deal with the problems that they face. They were underfunded and broken by the previous Government. We have now put that support funding in place. That is the right thing to do.
It was such great news when the Government decided that it was right to pay compensation to the LGBT veterans who had unfairly lost their jobs. Unfortunately, those veterans are not alone. There are others who have been prepared to lay down their lives on behalf of the country who have also been treated disgracefully. I include in that list my constituent who was sacked from MI6 simply for being gay. Will my right hon. and learned Friend please commit to righting that wrong and to meeting my constituent?
I am grateful to my right hon. Friend for raising this really important issue. All those who serve our country deserve our fullest respect and gratitude. That is why we are righting the historic wrongs inflicted on LGBT veterans, already significantly increasing  the compensation available and enabling them to get their ranks restored. I know that this is a real issue for the Foreign Secretary. He is looking at it, and I will make sure that she gets to talk to him about it. We do need to deal with this historic injustice; she is right about that.
Given the strategic commitment to Irish unity in the programme for government of the new Government in Dublin, may I ask the Prime Minister whether he and his Government have a strategic and economic interest in retaining Northern Ireland within the United Kingdom? If they do, why then is he continuing with the system whereby, in over 300 areas of law in the economic sphere, Northern Ireland is subject not to UK law, but to the same laws that apply in the Irish Republic—laws that we do not make and cannot change?
We are proud of, and totally committed to, the Good Friday agreement. Northern Ireland matters to this Government, and it matters to me. The hon. and learned Gentleman will know that I worked there for five years with the Police Service of Northern Ireland. I want to see Northern Ireland secure and safe for all communities and thriving in the future. I believe that it can be, and we will do everything to make sure that it is.
Tomorrow marks the 20th anniversary of the loss of RAF aircraft XV179 and the 10 UK service personnel who were killed onboard. Those service personnel were known to their friends as Steady, Smudge, Gary Nic, Pards, Gibbo, Ritchie, Bob, Dave, Jonesy and Paddy. They were killed on a routine flight between Baghdad and Balad as the result of a poorly protected aircraft. This was the largest single loss of life in the Iraq war. Will the Prime Minister join me in thanking and recognising our service personnel for their service and their sacrifice, and their families for their stoicism, as we gather to commemorate such a tragic moment?
I thank my hon. Friend for reminding the House of this case. I know that the condolences of the whole House remain with the families of these brave soldiers. We will never forget the vital role they played in supporting the coalition operation in Iraq. I also thank my hon. Friend and pay tribute to his service. We are immensely proud of our armed forces and their courage and dedication as they keep our country safe.
The Prime Minister may know that, this time last week, representatives of those who have been injured seriously  by covid vaccines were giving evidence to the covid inquiry, including my constituent, Kate Scott. I hope he also knows that the compensation available to those people is not adequate and is not adequately accessible. I am grateful to the Health and Social Care Secretary for the thought that I know he is giving to how that position may be remedied, but may I ask the Prime Minister to give his personal support to that objective, not just because it is the right thing to do for the people affected, but because it will support the objective that we should all share, which is to maintain public confidence in vaccination?
I thank the right hon. and learned Gentleman for raising that. As he says, the Health Secretary is looking at it. I assure him that I will also look at it with the Health Secretary, and we will get back to him as we do so.
This week, I heard a story from an elderly resident in Bedworth. Kolin Basra phoned the GP surgery to make an appointment for his elderly wife and was told that no appointments would be available for three months. Does the Prime Minister agree that that is utterly shocking and horrifying, and a direct result of 14 years of neglect by the Conservative party?
I thank my hon. Friend for raising that. She is absolutely right: the damage that the Conservatives did to the NHS was absolutely unforgiveable. We are taking steps to ensure that more GP appointments will be available, we are getting the waiting lists down, and we are putting investment into the NHS. As with everything else, we are clearing up the mess that they left behind.
The Prime Minister should know that my Romford constituents are shocked, angry and dismayed by the suggestion by the Office for National Statistics that the population of this country will rise to 72.5 million by 2032—that is 500,000 people a year, which is unsustainable. Who voted for that, and will the Government do something to ensure that the population of this country is sustainable going forward? There is no mandate for such a colossal increase in immigration to this country.
I think the hon. Gentleman should talk to his party leader. Net migration went through the roof under the previous Government—by nearly 1 million; it quadrupled—and who was cheering it on? The Leader of the Opposition. The hon. Gentleman’s constituents are right to be concerned about the loss of control by the previous Government. We are taking control; we will bring those numbers down. But the record is absolutely clear, and it sits right there on the Opposition Benches.
With your permission, Mr Speaker, I would like to update the House on the Government’s work to unlock investment and secure economic growth. That is the No. 1 mission of this Government. Without growth, we cannot deliver on the priorities of the British people, cut NHS waiting lists, rebuild our schools or put more police on our streets. That is why the pursuit of growth is our first mission, putting our country on a new path towards a brighter future after 14 years of failure from the Conservatives. By helping businesses to invest and create wealth, we ensure they can provide jobs and opportunities that change lives, putting more pounds in people’s pockets and rejuvenating communities across the country.
We have seen progress on that already, with huge private sector investments into our country since this Government came into service, but now we must go faster and further. We must help businesses and places to achieve their potential. We do that by being an active and strategic state—one that works in true partnership with businesses, investors and local leaders to deliver for the British people in every corner of the country. That principle was at the heart of the Chancellor’s speech earlier today in Oxfordshire, where she announced the latest steps that the Government are taking to drive growth across the country. I am pleased to update the House on those announcements now.
The economic growth we are pursuing must reach into every town, city and community across the United Kingdom—inclusive growth for everyone, not just those at the top—because there is untapped talent and unrealised opportunity throughout the country and we cannot let that go to waste any longer. If we can raise the productivity of major cities like Manchester, Birmingham and Leeds just to the national average, we will deliver an extra £33 billion in economic output. So I can confirm that our plans for regional growth will be hardwired into the spending review, the infrastructure strategy, the industrial strategy and our approach to trade and investment.
We are already providing £200 million of funding to support the development of a new mass transit system in West Yorkshire, and at the autumn Budget we secured improved connections between towns and cities from Manchester through to York. We are also developing our plans to further improve connectivity in the north and across the country through our 10-year infrastructure strategy, which will set out our long-term vision for social and economic infrastructure across the country.
Today we are progressing with the Wrexham and Flintshire investment zone, focusing on the area’s incredible strength in advanced manufacturing to leverage in £1 billion of private investment and create up to 6,000 new jobs. As the Chancellor announced at Davos last week, the Office for Investment will work hand in hand with local areas to develop opportunities for international inward investment, starting with the Liverpool city region and the North East combined authority, while the national wealth fund will build on its strength and combined authority engagement to build a pipeline of investable propositions with mayors, starting with strategic partnerships in the Glasgow city region, West Yorkshire,  the west midlands and Greater Manchester. Sticking with Manchester, we are giving our support to the Mayor of Greater Manchester’s plan for the redevelopment of Old Trafford, creating new housing, new commercial developments and a new stadium—but, I am advised to inform the House, not necessarily Government-wide support for the team that play there.
I am pleased to update the House on our new approach to the Oxford-Cambridge growth corridor, a hugely exciting opportunity for the UK and the British economy. For centuries these two cities have been synonymous with inspiration, invention and innovation. Economic analysis suggests that with the right support the region could bring a GDP boost of £78 billion by 2035, yet time and again Governments have failed to capitalise on this remarkable area, most recently in 2021 when the last Government dropped their commitment to what they called the Ox-Cam arc project.
Through under-investment, poor transport connections and a lack of affordable housing, the incredible growth potential of the area has been squandered as people and businesses have been forced to move and invest elsewhere. No longer: Lord Vallance will act as our champion for the growth corridor, utilising his impressive experience in life sciences, academia and Government to unlock growth opportunities across the region and promote its potential to investors across the world. We will establish a new growth commission for Oxford, to recognise and capitalise on the growth potential of this historic city.
We already know, of course, that transportation is a huge factor in the success of the country. Heathrow is the UK’s only hub airport and our largest air freight hub by volume, connecting us to emerging markets around the world, opening up new opportunities for trade and investment. But its growth has been constrained for decades. Today we are announcing that the Government support and are inviting proposals for a third runway at Heathrow airport, to be brought forward by the summer. This is an important infrastructure project expected to have positive growth impacts across the United Kingdom, and it has the backing of businesses and business groups including the CBI, the Federation of Small Businesses and British Chambers of Commerce as well as trade unions such as the GMB and Unite.
According to a recent study from Frontier Economics, a third runway could increase GDP by 0.43% over the next 25 years, with over half—60%—of that boost going to areas outside London and the south-east. It could create over 100,000 jobs in the local area and maintain Heathrow’s status both as a global passenger hub and as the UK’s largest air freight hub by volume.
Reforms this Government have introduced to speed up the planning system will ensure the delivery of the project and set it up for success. Once proposals have been received the Government will take forward a full assessment through the airport national policy statement to ensure that any scheme is delivered in line with our legal, environmental and climate obligations. We want the scheme to be value for money, and our clear expectation is that any surface transport costs associated with the project will be financed by private capital and should be sustainable and low-carbon. The Secretary of State for Transport will also set out planning decisions for further airport expansion at Gatwick and Luton shortly.
Crucially, I am pleased to announce that we are taking further steps in our transition to greener, cleaner aviation. At the start of the month, the sustainable aviation fuel mandate became law. Sustainable aviation fuel reduces carbon dioxide emissions compared with fossil jet fuel by around 70%. Today we are announcing an additional £63 million for the advanced fuels fund over the next year, and we have set out the details of how we will deliver a revenue certainty mechanism. Those measures will support investment and high-skill green jobs in plants across the United Kingdom, delivering sustainable aviation fuel here in the UK for UK consumption.
Transportation is equally important on a local level, and that is as true for the Oxford-Cambridge growth corridor as it is for anywhere else. This Government have confirmed that they will provide crucial funding for transport links, including upgrades to the A428 to reduce journey times between Milton Keynes, Bedford and Cambridge, as well as for East West Rail with new services between Oxford and Milton Keynes starting this year. We have already received submissions to the new towns taskforce to build new developments along the new railway. At Tempsford, we will accelerate delivery of a mainline station on the east coast main line so that travellers can get to London in under an hour and to Cambridge in under 30 minutes once East West Rail has been delivered.
We will ensure that the pioneering work that has long been a hallmark of the area will continue. We are today committing to a new AI growth zone in Culham. We welcome the University of Cambridge’s plan for a new flagship innovation hub in the centre of Cambridge, and a new Cambridge cancer research hospital will be delivered as part of wave one of the new hospital programme. Just yesterday, Moderna completed the build for its new vaccine production and research and development site in Harwell, while committing to invest £1 billion in the United Kingdom—proof that when we create the conditions for success, businesses can lead the way.
I am pleased to confirm for the House that the Environment Agency is lifting its objections to specific developments in Cambridge, so we will press on with plans to develop 4,500 additional homes, new schools and office, retail and lab spaces in and around Cambridge. In a further boost to the area, we have now agreed water resource management plans with water companies, unlocking £7.9 billion of investment in water resources over the next five years, including the new Fens reservoir serving Cambridge and the south-east strategic reservoir near Oxford.
This Government have come in with a purpose: to bring growth, and with it opportunity, to the country. In just six months, we have taken the tough decisions to make that possible. We are taking on the responsibility of a Government who deliver real change for people—no longer the hollow promises of the Conservative party, but change delivered under this Labour Government, working with business and local leaders to drive the growth that will lift up this country. Now we must go further and faster so that the next generation and the generation after will have the opportunities they deserve, to ensure that Britain is strong and successful once  again in a fast-changing world and so that everybody in this country can have the chance to succeed. Today’s announcements will help make that a reality and show how our plan for change will build a better Britain. I commend the statement to the House.
I call the shadow Chancellor of the Exchequer.
The Chief Secretary told us that growth is the No. 1 mission of this Government and added, “Now we must go faster”, which I have to tell him suggests a certain lack of ambition. What we do not need is some hasty mañana moment of unquantified, vague promises of a better tomorrow; we need action now to reverse the grievous damage that this Chancellor has wrought in just her first six months in office. Why did the Government deliver a Budget that the independent Office for Budget Responsibility said would lead to lower growth, higher inflation and higher interest rates and would cost jobs? I have to tell the right hon. Gentleman that “going for growth” in the 2030s means nothing to the businesses that have already stopped hiring, shed workers and put up prices thanks to Labour’s ruinous policies.
It is hard to escape the conclusion that these announcements have been hastily cobbled together by a Government who are under increasing pressure to change course but are seemingly incapable of doing so. Why have these announcements come only now? The Labour party had years in opposition and months in government leading up to its first Budget. If the Government really wanted to unleash investment, innovation and the private sector, they should not have decided in the autumn to increase substantially the tax burden and the size of the state. By doing so, far from encouraging private investment, they are actively squeezing it out. Will the Chief Secretary to the Treasury reassure businesses right now that there will be no further growth-destroying fiscal measures in the spring statement, including tax rises?
Is the truth not that the damage is already being done? Even before Labour’s tax rises bite in April, the economy is flatlining right now, so will any of the announcements have an impact within this Parliament, and what—if any—impact are they likely to have on the OBR’s forecasts in March?
Incredibly, the Chancellor said in her speech that businesses are what drive growth and that the Government should support them, yet this is a Government who have driven business confidence off a cliff. They have taxed businesses to the hilt and, through their upcoming employment legislation, will be hitting them still further with ever more job-destroying red tape. Can the Chief Secretary to the Treasury set out what the overall impact of Government policy decisions since July has been on regulatory costs for businesses? Does he agree with the Business Secretary’s extraordinary utterance on the media this morning that the Government have not hammered businesses?
The Chancellor claimed this morning that she has seen no alternative suggestions from the Opposition, so let me give her one now. Last year, the Conservative manifesto included £12 billion in welfare savings. At the time, the Labour party said that the money simply was not there. Now we are told that the Government will shortly be coming forward with plans for welfare reform—  another damascene conversion. If they had grasped this issue when they came into office, they could have tackled the rising welfare bill, rather than taxing jobs and killing growth. The Government’s failure to act means that businesses and millions of people are paying the price, so can the Chief Secretary to the Treasury commit today to matching that £12 billion, or can he at least tell us the scale of savings that we can expect from his promised reforms?
Some of the announcements made today are of course welcome. The role of the Opposition is not to oppose for opposition’s sake, not least because many of the measures announced are reheated from the previous Conservative Government. The plans on pension investment, for example, seem oddly familiar to us, probably because they are simply to continue the reforms that I was bringing in when I was Secretary of State for Work and Pensions. Even in this area, though, we must wait and see before passing judgment, because this Government have shown that we simply cannot trust their word. They promised not to raise taxes, but they did. They promised not to cut winter fuel payments, but they did. They promised not to borrow more, but they did. We need to see action, not just words.
The Chancellor talks about removing barriers to growth—oh yes, she talks about it—but that talk comes from the same person whose Budget killed the economy and growth stone-dead. If we are looking to remove the greatest barriers to growth in this country, perhaps we should start with the Prime Minister and the Chancellor of the Exchequer.
The House is indebted to the shadow Chancellor—Mr Melmentum himself—for his lecture on the need for speed from this Government. Let me tell him that we have done more in the last six or seven months than that lot did in the last 14 years.
The shadow Chancellor asked me about our plans to work with business. The comments today from business leaders and investors speak for themselves: our plans are welcomed by businesses, and we will be working in partnership with them to deliver for this country. He also asked me about work. Those of us in the Labour party make no secret of the fact that we like to support people into work—strong, secure work with workplace rights and secure incomes to help make people’s family finances add up. That is why our party was created in the first place. The real truth from the data is that under the last Government, too many people were waiting at home sick, unable to get NHS appointments or access to mental health services so that they could be helped back into work. Too many people were waiting at home, waiting for training and unable to seize the opportunities advertised in front of them. This Labour Government will not treat those things as a luxury, but will work at speed to give people the work they deserve.
At the heart of the shadow Chancellor’s statement was a truth for the country to consider. Under the last Administration, it was promises cancelled; under this Administration, it is promises being delivered.
I call the Chair of the Treasury Committee.
I welcome this Government’s commitment to infrastructure investment and to telling the world that Britain is open for business, but to achieve all of this, we will need a really skilled workforce to deliver on  those major construction projects. May I ask my right hon. Friend to set out how the Government will ensure that we have the skills to deliver what he has promised?
I thank the Chair of the Treasury Committee for her question. This is an important test of turning policy into real-world delivery. Through our infrastructure and industrial strategies, we are engaging right now with businesses and investors across the country so that as we bring forward our plans, we have a skills and training system that creates opportunities for people to take up the jobs that we need them to do in order to help get Britain building. That will be a crucial part of our approach to infrastructure, so that every person across the country can seize the benefits of this Government’s plans.
I call the Liberal Democrat spokesperson.
The Government are absolutely right to focus on economic growth, but their blinkered approach on Europe is holding back British businesses and stifling the very growth that we need to fund our public services. By ruling out negotiations with the EU on a bespoke customs union and a youth mobility scheme, the Chancellor’s dash for growth will be more like a slow crawl in a car with the handbrake on. In order to turbocharge economic growth, will the Government start negotiating those initiatives now?
To unleash growth through our small businesses, the Chancellor should scrap her national insurance contributions rise, and instead seek to raise the same amount of money through the measures that we Liberal Democrats have suggested: reversing the tax cuts on the big banks, increasing taxes on the big tech and gaming companies, and reforming capital gains tax in a way that would be fairer and raise more money. Will the Government look again at those alternative revenue raisers and lift the burden that the Government have placed on small business?
On airports, the Chancellor has voiced her support for Heathrow expansion and has suggested that expansion will be forthcoming for other airports. We Liberal Democrats oppose this, because it will deliver minimal growth at a huge cost to the climate. Can the Government confirm whether they intend to abide by the advice of their own climate change advisers that no airport expansion should proceed until a UK-wide capacity management framework is in place? In the midst of a climate emergency, can the Government give a cast-iron guarantee that the so-called refreshed carbon budget that the Chancellor referred to will not water down climate targets, and what do they have to say to those experts who say that sustainable aviation fuel is not realistic or scalable?
Turning to the Oxford-Cambridge growth corridor, we really welcome plans that further boost the UK’s position as a European and global science leader. Can the Government confirm that there will be enough money for the whole of the route to be constructed on the East West Rail route, and that they will work hand in glove with local authorities to minimise the environmental impacts, introduce infrastructure before or alongside housing, and maximise local community benefits?
As the hon. Lady knows, this Government committed in their manifesto to not rejoin the single market or the customs union. We will honour that promise, but the trade deal that the previous Government  put together was clearly not good enough. There is room for us to improve our trading, energy and security relationships with our friends in the European Union, and my ministerial colleagues are in active discussions with their counterparts to take that work forward.
The hon. Lady invited me to speculate on any future Budgets. That is above my pay grade, but I am sure the Chancellor heard her suggestions. On airports, as I said in my statement, all our plans will be in line with our legal obligations. Of course, we recognise the need for more sustainable fuel and sustainable transport as part of those expansion plans.
Lastly, the hon. Lady asked me about something that I cannot read—
East West Rail.
Thank you. I thought it was “EU” again—I could not read my own handwriting.
The whole premise of the growth corridor is that we will have a transport spine through that corridor that allows for all the developments—housing, lab space or communities—around it. That is a crucial part of our plans, and we will make sure that it is delivered.
I congratulate the Chief Secretary to the Treasury and the Chancellor of the Exchequer on a plan for growth that is both concrete—shovels in the ground now—and forward-looking, building on our scientific and skills base to drive long-term jobs and higher living standards. Heathrow expansion will help businesses in the north-east, but for the sake of those of us who are not Manchester United fans, will the Chief Secretary to the Treasury make it clear that much of the investment in the Man U development will be private sector-based? Will he also set out how that will help the rest of the north, particularly Newcastle United fans such as myself?
I thank the Chair of the Science, Innovation and Technology Committee for her question. She and her Committee know the huge advantage we have in the UK with our brilliant universities and research and development ecosystem, which is why we are supporting them and putting rocket boosters underneath their activity to develop world-leading and frontier research and innovation, and stimulate economic growth across the country.
My hon. Friend is right that the development in Manchester is a broad set of privately financed housing and commercial opportunities, as well as the work that Manchester United wants to do with its football stadium. I should inform the House that I cannot give a running commentary on the stadium applications for all football clubs across the country, and she will have to forgive me for not knowing the latest plans for Newcastle.
I welcome the Government’s conversion on a third runway at Heathrow. The sort of connectivity that that enables, particularly with fast-growing economies in Asia and the Gulf, is essential to growth. However, what assurance can the Chief Secretary to the Treasury give the House that this  project will not subsequently be stymied by an absolutist approach driven by ideology towards carbon emissions, which will drive it into the ground? We have been down this path before.
The right hon. Member has been down this path before because it was his Government who went down it and blocked all these developments over the past 14 years. This Government are working on reforms to the planning system, looking at national policy statements, thinking about skills and infrastructure supply chains, and unlocking private capital because we are a Government who want to get Britain building again, and not block the projects that were stalled for years under the previous Administration.
I call Dr Jeevun Sandher, a member of the Select Committee.
Investment is what makes us more prosperous; it produces more work, it gets wages rising and it creates good jobs. I am an East Midlands MP, and we have some of the lowest investment rates in the country, the least transport infrastructure and some of the lowest private investment. That is why I welcome the announcement today of £1 billion going to the manufacturing and logistics hub at East Midlands airport. I especially welcome the 2,000 extra jobs that will benefit my constituents in Loughborough, Shepshed and Hathern. Will the Chief Secretary assure me that this is just the beginning of the investment we can expect in the region and for my constituents?
I thank my hon. Friend, who is a strong advocate for the economy in the East Midlands and for his constituency. He will know that I visited the region last week and met businesses and investors with our Mayor, Claire Ward. The region is doing a brilliant job of securing inward investment, and there is huge untapped potential in the East Midlands. I am pleased that the Chancellor was able to make those announcements today, and we very much look forward to hearing about more business cases and more potential so that we can unlock growth in the East Midlands.
I call Select Committee member Dame Harriett Baldwin.
I am sure the Chief Secretary knows and admires the plan for growth of Conservative-led Worcestershire county council. It has been working through the plan, and it has built a new train station on the North Cotswold line, which connects Worcestershire to Oxford, but a lot of that line is still single track. Will he urge the Oxford growth commission to look at the extensive work done by Oxfordshire county council and Worcestershire county council to find a way to double the frequency of the train services on that stretch of track?
I thank the hon. Lady. The growth commission will be looking at all potential options for stimulating growth. We want to find strategic enabling investments across the country to unlock, for example, house building and inward investment, and I am sure it will look at those proposals with interest.
I call Select Committee member Rachel Blake.
I thank the Chief Secretary for his statement about investment and growth. Does he agree with me about the role that new towns will play in tackling our country’s housing crisis and how important it is that, alongside the homes in the new towns, we see the delivery of new social infrastructure? Can he outline how those plans will work?
I thank my hon. Friend. As I informed the House recently, our infrastructure strategy, which will be published in June, will for the first time align social infrastructure plans for schools, GP surgeries and other public service facilities with those for housing and economic infrastructure. For the first time, we will be making strategic decisions about the places where people live.
On the house building target—I met tenants who will be moving into new social homes in Erewash last week—we talk about 1.5 million homes and about economic growth, but in every one of those buildings is someone’s life, their opportunities and the dreams they want to fulfil. This Government are delivering on economic growth, and we are doing so because the people at the heart of all these decisions are the people we need to get the economy moving and Britain doing well in the future.
I call Select Committee member John Glen.
Among the fundamental enablers of growth in the economy are financial services and opening up markets to invest. I think there was consensus across this House in the last Parliament on the Financial Services and Markets Act 2023, which provided the framework to do that. What concrete proposals have come forward from the Financial Conduct Authority and the Prudential Regulation Authority consideration of changing some of the restrictions that stop the right levels of investment? This week, the Government enabled about £100 billion of surplus funds from defined-benefit pension schemes to be made available. What proportion of that money will be invested and in what timeframe? The concern around these announcements is the delay to tangible, calculable economic impact.
I point the right hon. Member to the Chancellor’s Mansion House speech, which set out in detail this Government’s approach to financial services. They are an important enabler for the UK and a particular strength globally, as I know he knows very well. On his particular question, I will need to write to him with the answer, but he can see that this Government are taking action to unlock investment in the UK economy. As has been reported, the Prime Minister and the Chancellor have been meeting regulators to make sure that they are geared for growth as well as for protecting consumers.
