I beg to move, That the House sit in private.
Question put forthwith ( Standing Order No. 163 ) and negatived.
Further consideration of Bill, as amended in the Public Bill Committee
Before we come to the Bill, I would like to say a few words about today’s proceedings. On  13 June , an objection was taken to the Question that new clause 16 be read a Second time. As the objection was taken after 2.30 pm, proceedings on the Bill stopped. We will begin with the Question that new clause 16 be read a Second time. I will then put the Questions on the amendments selected for separate decisions. I can confirm that I have selected all the amendments in the name of Kim Leadbeater for separate decision, as well as amendments 14, 24, 12 and 21.
Once the decisions on Report are complete, I will then call the Member in charge to name the day for Third Reading. If she says now, Third Reading will begin then. Many colleagues will wish to participate in the debate today. I hope the Divisions that we are about to have can take place reasonably quickly in order to maximise the time available today.
On  13 June , Rebecca Paul moved formally that new clause 16 be read a Second time.
“(1) A person does not have a wish to seek assistance to end their own life in accordance with this Act under section 5(5) if they are substantially motivated by—
(a) not wanting to be a burden on others or on public services,
(b) a mental disorder (including depression),
(c) a disability (other than the terminal illness),
(d) financial considerations, including lack of adequate housing,
(e) lack of access, or delayed access, to treatment or other service which a public authority is required (or can reasonably be expected to) provide, or
(f) suicidal ideation.”—(Rebecca Paul.)
This new clause ensures that a wish to end one’s own life that is substantially motivated by the factors listed in the amendment does not qualify for the provision of assistance under this Act.
Question put, That the clause be read a Second time.
The House divided: Ayes 208, Noes 261.
Question accordingly negatived.
Amendments made: 14, page 2, line 6, at end insert—
“(1A) A person who would not otherwise meet the requirements of subsection (1) shall not be considered to meet those requirements solely as a result of voluntarily stopping eating or drinking.”—(Naz Shah.)
This amendment means that someone who is not terminally ill within the meaning of subsection (1) cannot bring themselves within that definition by voluntarily stopping eating or drinking or both.
Amendment 55, page 2, line 8, leave out “, disease or medical condition” and insert “or disease”.—(Kim Leadbeater.)
This amendment aligns the wording of subsection (2) with the wording used in subsection (1) (which defines what it means to be “terminally ill” for the purposes of the Bill).
Amendment proposed: 24, in clause 3, page 2, line 18, at end insert
“except that section 1(2) of that Act shall not apply”.—(Daniel Francis.)
This amendment would disapply the presumption that a person has capacity unless the opposite is established.
The House divided: Ayes 213, Noes 266.
Question accordingly negatived.
Amendments made: 56, page 4, line 14, at end insert—
“(2A) The coordinating doctor must give a copy of the first declaration to the Commissioner as soon as reasonably practicable after it has been made.”
This amendment requires the coordinating doctor to give a copy of the first declaration to the Commissioner.
Amendment 57, page 5, line 14, leave out “include training about” and insert “provide that the practitioner must have had training about the following”.
This clarifies that the obligation under subsection (7) is to specify training about certain matters.
Amendment 58, page 5, line 18, leave out
“specific and up-to-date training on”.
This clarifies that the training is to be about adjustments and safeguards for autistic people and person with a learning disability (rather than training about training about such matters).
Amendment 59, page 5, line 19, at end insert—
“(d) domestic abuse.”—(Kim Leadbeater.)
This is a drafting change (moving the duty for the regulations to require the coordinating doctor to have received training on domestic abuse so that it is located with other similar duties). See also amendment 74, which defines “domestic abuse” for the purposes of the Bill.
Amendment made: 60, page 7, line 1, at end insert—
“(6) Where—
(a) a referral is made under subsection (3)(c),
(b) the independent doctor dies or through illness is unable or unwilling to act as the independent doctor, and
(c) no report under section 10 has been made by virtue of the referral,
a further referral may be made under subsection (3)(c).
(7) Where a referral is made to a registered medical practitioner by virtue of subsection (6), that practitioner becomes the independent doctor (replacing the registered medical practitioner to whom a referral was originally made) and sections 10 to 12 and (Replacing the coordinating or independent doctor where unable or unwilling to continue to act) apply accordingly.”—(Kim Leadbeater.)
This amendment makes provision, corresponding to the provision in clause 12 about the death or illness of a doctor from whom a second opinion is sought, for a further referral to be made where, before reporting, the independent doctor dies or through illness is unable or unwilling to act.
Amendments made: 61, page 8, line 22, leave out “include training about” and insert
“provide that the practitioner must have had training about the following”.
This clarifies that the obligation under subsection (10) is to specify training about certain matters.
Amendment 62, page 8, line 25, at end insert—
“(c) domestic abuse.”—(Kim Leadbeater.)
This is a drafting change.
Amendment made: 63, page 9, line 44, leave out “, disease or condition” and insert “or disease”.—(Kim Leadbeater.)
This amendment aligns the wording used here with the wording used in Clause 2(1) (which defines what it means to be “terminally ill” for the purposes of the Bill).
Amendments made: 64, page 10, line 40, leave out “section 10 and 11” and insert
“sections 10, 11 and (Replacing the coordinating or independent doctor where unable or unwilling to continue to act)”.
This amendment is consequential on NC11.
Amendment 65, page 11, line 3, at end insert
“and section (Replacing the coordinating or independent doctor where unable or unwilling to continue to act)(6)(a)(ii)”.—(Kim Leadbeater.)
This amendment is consequential on NC11.
Amendments made: 66, page 19, line 21, leave out “subsection (3)” and insert “subsection (2)”.
This is a drafting change.
Amendment 67, page 19, line 32, at end insert—
“(6A) An approved substance may be provided to a person under subsection (2) by—
(a) preparing a device which will enable that person to self-administer the substance, and
(b) providing that person with the device.
In the case of an approved substance so provided, the reference in subsection (3) to the approved substance is to be read as a reference to the device.”
This amendment clarifies how the clause works in cases where an approved substance is provided by preparing a device and providing a person with the device.
Amendment 68, page 19, line 36, leave out paragraph (b). —(Kim Leadbeater.)
This amendment is consequential on amendment 67.
Amendment made: 69, page 21, line 8, leave out subsection (3) and insert—
“(3) See section (Regulation of approved substances and devices for self-administration) for powers to make provision about—
(a) approved substances, and
(b) devices for use or used in connection with the self-administration of approved substances.”—(Kim Leadbeater.)
This is consequential on NC13.
Amendment made: 91, page 21, line 22, leave out paragraph (a) and insert—
“(a) the person’s full name, date of birth, sex, ethnicity, and last permanent address;
(aa) whether, immediately before death, the person had a disability within the meaning of section 6 of the Equality Act 2010 (other than a disability consisting of the illness or disease which caused the person to be terminally ill within the meaning of this Act);”.—(Kim Leadbeater.)
This amendment expands the duty as regards regulations about final statements so as to provide that certain additional information is included in final statements.
Amendment made: 52, page 22, line 28, leave out clause 28.—(Kim Leadbeater.)
This amendment is consequential on NC10.
Amendment made: 53, page 25, line 24, leave out clause 34.—(Kim Leadbeater.)
This amendment is consequential on NC13.
Amendment made: 54, page 25, line 34, leave out clause 35.—(Kim Leadbeater.)
This amendment is consequential on NC15.
Amendments made: 70, page 27, line 20, at end insert—
“(ca) ensuring effective communication in connection with persons seeking assistance under this Act to end their own lives, including the use of interpreters;”.
This amendment provides that a code of practice must be issued covering ensuring effective communication in connection with persons seeking assistance under the Bill.
Amendment 71, page 27, line 35, leave out subsection (3). —(Kim Leadbeater.)
This amendment is consequential on amendment 70.
Amendment made: 89, page 28, line 7, leave out clause 37. —(Kim Leadbeater.)
This amendment is consequential on NC20.
Amendment proposed: 12, page 28, line 36, leave out subsections (4) and (5) and insert—
“(4A) Regulations under subsection (1) may not amend, modify or repeal section 1 of the National Health Service Act 2006.”—(Dame Siobhain McDonagh.)
This amendment would prevent section 1 of the National Health Service Act 2006, which sets out the purposes of the NHS, from being amended by regulations. Its effect would be to require changes to be made by an Act of Parliament instead.
Question put, That the amendment be made.
The House divided: Ayes 223, Noes 269.
Question accordingly negatived.
Amendments made: 92, page 29, line 13, leave out from “Wales” to end of line 14
This amendment and amendment 93 ensure that the power under subsection (3) also covers provision securing that arrangements are made for the provision of services, so far as such provision is outside the legislative competence of the Senedd.
Amendment 93, page 29, line 27, at end insert—
“(b) a reference to provision about voluntary assisted dying services includes in particular provision securing that arrangements are made for the provision of such services.”—(Kim Leadbeater.)
See the statement for Amendment 92.
Amendment made: 21, page 31, line 15, at end insert—
“(4) For the first reporting period referred to under subsection (2) (a) the report must set out an assessment of the state of health services to persons with palliative and end of life care needs and the implications of this Act on those services.
(5) The report under subsection (4) must, in particular, include an assessment of the availability, quality and distribution of appropriate health services to persons with palliative and end of life care needs, including—
(a) pain and symptom management;
(b) psychological support for those persons and their families;
(c) information about palliative care and how to access it.”—(Munira Wilson.)
This amendment would require the Secretary of State for Health and Social Care to prepare and publish an assessment of the availability, quality and distribution of palliative and end of life care services as part of the first report on implementation of the Act (to be undertaken within 1 year of the Act being passed). This would mirror the assessment already required as part of the 5 year review of the act.
Amendment made: 90, page 33, line 18, leave out clause 47.—(Kim Leadbeater.)
This amendment is consequential on NC21.
Amendments made: 72, page 34, line 24, after “10(9)”, insert
“(Regulation of approved substances and devices for self-administration),”
This amendment provides that regulations under NC13 are subject to the draft affirmative procedure.
Amendment 73, page 34, line 25, leave out “or 39” and insert
“39, or (Prohibition on advertising)”.—(Kim Leadbeater.)
This amendment provides that regulations under NC14 are subject to the draft affirmative procedure.
Amendments made: 74, page 35, line 20, at end insert—
““domestic abuse” has the meaning given by section 1 of the Domestic Abuse Act 2021 (and accordingly includes behaviour that is controlling or coercive or that constitutes economic abuse);”
This amendment defines “domestic abuse” for the purposes of the Bill.
Amendment 75, page 35, line 31, at end insert—
““learning disability” has the meaning given by section 1(4) of the Mental Health Act 1983;” —(Kim Leadbeater.)
This amendment defines “learning disability” for the purposes of the Bill.
Amendment made: 76, page 36, line 12, at beginning insert “Subject as follows,”—(Kim Leadbeater.)
This amendment is consequential on amendment 77.
Amendment proposed: 77, page 36, line 12, at end insert “only.
(2) Sections (Regulation of approved substances and devices for self-administration), (Prohibition on advertising), 50 and 52, this section, and sections 54 and 55 extend to England and Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland.
(3) Section (No obligation to provide assistance etc)(8) and Schedule (Protection from detriment) extend to England and Wales and Scotland.”—(Kim Leadbeater.)
This amendment provides for NC13 (regulation of approved substances etc) and NC14 (prohibition on advertising), and the general provisions of the Bill, to extend to each part of the United Kingdom; and for NC10 (no obligation to provide assistance etc) and NS1 (protection from detriment) to extend to England and Wales and Scotland.
The House divided: Ayes 275, Noes 209.
Question accordingly agreed to.
Amendment 77 agreed to.
Amendment proposed: 94, page 36, line 25, leave out “Wales” and insert
“sections 39(1) and (2) and (Provision about the Welsh language)(2) and (3) which come into force on such day as the Welsh Ministers may by regulations appoint.”—(Kim Leadbeater.)
This amendment provides that the Welsh Ministers have power to commence clauses 39(1) and (2) and NC21(2) and (3), and that other provisions of the Bill come into force in accordance with subsections (1) to (4) of this clause.
Question put, That the amendment be made.
The House divided: Ayes 274, Noes 224.
Question accordingly agreed to.
Amendment 94 agreed to.
Amendment made: 95, page 36, line 26, leave out subsection (6).—(Kim Leadbeater.)
This amendment is consequential on Amendment 94.
1 The Employment Rights Act 1996 is amended as follows.
2 After section 43M insert—
“43N Provision of assistance under Terminally Ill Adults (End of Life) Act 2025
(1) A worker has the right not to be subjected to any detriment by any act, or any deliberate failure to act, by the worker’s employer done on the ground that the worker has—
(a) exercised (or proposed to exercise) a right conferred on the worker under section (No obligation to provide assistance etc) of the Terminally Ill Adults (End of Life) Act 2025 (no obligation to provide assistance etc), or
(b) participated in the provision of assistance to a person to end their own life in accordance with that Act, or performed any other function under that Act, in accordance with that Act.
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply where—
(a) the worker is an employee, and
(b) the detriment in question amounts to dismissal within the meaning of Part 10.
(3) For the purposes of this section, and of sections 48 and 49 so far as relating to this section, “worker” and “employer” have the extended meaning given by section 43K.”
3 (1) Section 48 (complaints to employment tribunals) is amended as follows.
(2) After subsection (1) insert—
“(1WA) A worker may present a complaint to an employment tribunal that the worker has been subjected to a detriment in contravention of section 43N(1).”
(3) In subsection (2), after “(1)” insert “, (1WA)”.
4 (1) Section 49 (remedies) is amended as follows.
(2) In subsection (1), after “section 48(1)” insert “, (1WA)”.
(3) In subsection (2), after “subsections” insert “(5YA),”.
(4) After subsection (5) insert—
“(5YA) Where—
(a) the complaint is made under section 48(1WA),
(b) the detriment to which the worker is subjected is the termination of the worker’s contract, and
(c) that contract is not a contract of employment, any compensation must not exceed the compensation that would be payable under Chapter 2 of Part 10 if the worker had been an employee and had been dismissed for a reason specified in section 98C.”
5 After section 98B insert—
“98C Provision of assistance under Terminally Ill Adults (End of Life) Act 2025
An employee who is dismissed is to be regarded for the purposes of this Part as unfairly dismissed if the reason (or if more than one, the principal reason) for the dismissal is that the employee—
(a) exercised (or proposed to exercise) a right conferred on the employee under section (No obligation to provide assistance etc) of the Terminally Ill Adults (End of Life) Act 2025 (no obligation to provide assistance etc), or
(b) participated in the provision of assistance to a person to end their own life in accordance with that Act, or performed any other function under that Act, in accordance with that Act.”
6 In section 105 (redundancy), after subsection (2A) insert—
“(2B) This subsection applies if the reason (or, if more than one, the principal reason) for which the employee was selected for dismissal was one of those specified in section 98C.”
7 In section 108 (qualifying period of employment), in subsection (3), after paragraph (aa) insert—
“(ab) section 98C applies,”.
8 In section 205 (remedy for infringement of certain rights), after subsection (1) insert—
“(1XA) In relation to the right conferred by section 43N(1), the reference in subsection (1) to an employee has effect as a reference to a worker.”
9 In section 230 (definitions of employees, workers etc) in subsection (6)—
(a) after “43K” insert “, 43N(3)”;
(b) after “Part IVA” insert “, section 43N”.”—(Kim Leadbeater.)
This new Schedule amends the Employment Rights Act 1996 so as to provide remedies for persons subjected to detriment for exercising or proposing a right conferred by NC10 or for participating in the provision of assistance in accordance with, or performing any other function under, the Bill.
Brought up, read the First and Second time, and added to the Bill.
Amendments made: 78, page 42, line 26, at end insert
“, or
(b) abstains from voting on such a decision.”
This amendment ensures that a panel must not grant certificate of eligibility unless all members consider that such a certificate should be granted.
Amendment 79, page 43, line 7, at end insert—
“(2) As soon as reasonably practicable after making a decision, a panel must give the following a document containing its reasons for the decision—
(a) the person to whom the referral in question relates;
(b) the coordinating doctor in relation to the person;
(c) the Commissioner.”—(Kim Leadbeater.)
This amendment requires a panel to give the persons mentioned a document containing its reasons for any decision made by the panel.
On a point of order, Mr Speaker. There are reports of an extremely serious incident at Brize Norton, which is being described as vandalism but, if course, may be worse. Will there be a statement from the Ministry of Defence later?
I can say that I have been given no notice of the incident at Brize Norton; I know nothing of the incident. Those on the Front Bench will have heard the point. I would not want to interrupt today’s proceedings. If the incident was that serious and somebody was so minded, we could always put something on at the end of proceedings, but that would be for others, not for me at this stage.
Third Reading
A huge number of Members have indicated that they wish to speak in the debate. I hope that Members will restrict themselves to a reasonable amount of time—after the two opening speeches, I will advise on five minutes—to enable other colleagues to participate. We need shorter speeches to enable all Members, or as many as possible, to contribute. I shall make it clear that the Chair retains the right to impose a formal time limit, but I would rather colleagues helped each other. After all, it is an important day, and we do want to hear as many views as possible.
I beg to move, That the Bill be now read the Third time.
It is an honour and a privilege to open the debate on Third Reading of the Terminally Ill Adults (End of Life) Bill. It has been a long journey to get here, and I do not underestimate the significance of this day. It is not often that we are asked to wrestle with issues of morality, ethics and humanity, but with great privilege in this job comes great responsibility, and never more so than at a time like this.
Benjamin Franklin told us that
“in this world nothing can be said to be certain, except death and taxes.”
In this House we debate the latter incessantly, but here and in the country as a whole discussing death is something that we tend to shy away from, yet it will come to us all and to all those we love. We all have our own experiences of death, loss and grief. There are good deaths and bad deaths. I, like many, have experienced both.
I appreciate that, for some colleagues, the journey to this point has been a difficult one. I want to pay tribute to the way in which the overwhelming majority of Members have approached the subject. Second Reading back in November was quite rightly seen as an example of Parliament at its best. Contributions from across the  Chamber were incredibly powerful, the atmosphere was respectful, and people listened with care. I hope that we will see the same today.
I want to thank you, Mr Speaker, and your team along with the fantastic Clerks and procedural experts who have ensured that parliamentary protocols have been followed and have guided us through the intricacies of what can be a complex parliamentary process—one that is steeped in tradition, but not always easy to follow. Of course, process is important, but it is also important to remember that we are not voting on the merits of parliamentary procedure; we are voting on an issue that matters deeply to our constituents. Indeed, the issue before us is very personal for many people—so many of our constituents, but many of us as well. It is an issue that transcends party politics. I thank colleagues from across the House who have shared their very personal stories with me.
I am grateful to all colleagues who have studied the detail of the Bill. It is essential that we come to a decision based on the content of what it actually says. I have been pleased to work with Members on all sides of the debate to ensure that the legislation is something that Parliament can be proud of—a cogent, workable Bill that has one simple thread running through it: the need to correct the profound injustices of the status quo and to offer a compassionate and safe choice to terminally ill people who want to make it.
I will not go into the amendments in detail, as I know that is not the purpose of this debate, but whether by adding further safeguards and protections for patients through additional training around coercive control, the addition of specialist expertise through the inclusion of multidisciplinary panels, widening the provision for professionals to opt out of the assisted dying process, providing additional employment protections, or prohibiting the advertising of assisted dying, cross-party working has strengthened the Bill.
I am grateful to the hon. Lady for giving way. What level of concern does it give her that, between Second Reading and today, a growing canon of professionals and their independent professional bodies have urged great caution about this Bill, not on the principle, but because they are opposed to the details of this Bill and believe it should be defeated?
I thank the hon. Gentleman for his intervention. I think what he is saying is that people have got different views, and they do have different views; we have different views in this House, and different people in different professions have different views. Every royal college has a neutral position on assisted dying because of that.
I have been pleased to work with Members on all sides of the debate to ensure that this legislation is something that Parliament can be proud of, and the many safeguards in this Bill ensure that only terminally ill patients who are eligible under the strict criteria and want to access assisted dying can do so.
I felt disturbed by quite a lot of the emails that I received from constituents—some of them who are my friends and people I like—implying that we here are either too stupid or careless to care for  the most vulnerable. Is it not true that we all do care, whatever decision we make today, and that we have to continue to educate people and tell them what this Bill is about?
I thank the hon. Member for that intervention, and she is absolutely right; the detail does matter. That is why I am so grateful to colleagues who have engaged in the detail. We know that there are different views within the public, and we have to take on board the concerns of vulnerable groups—that is why the safeguards are so important—but I would also say that there is no one more vulnerable than someone who is dying.
Will my hon. Friend give way?
I am just going to make some progress.
Patients must have
“an inevitably progressive illness or disease which cannot be reversed by treatment”
and a person is not considered to be terminally ill only because they have a disability or a mental disorder. These clear, strict criteria, plus the multiple capacity assessments, exclude possible serious mental health disorders such as anorexia.
I was also very pleased to support the change advocated for by Marie Curie and Hospice UK, which would ensure an assessment of palliative and end-of-life care as part of the first report on the Act. We know from other countries, in no small part due to the 14-month inquiry by the Health and Social Care Committee, that palliative care and assisted dying can and do work side by side to give terminally ill patients the care and choice they deserve in their final days. It should not be an either/or for dying people, and we need to channel our energies into supporting all options for terminally ill people.
I am very grateful to the hon. Lady for giving way. As she knows, the leading experts in palliative care have come out to oppose the Bill, and they point to the fact that hospices are underfunded and do not have the same ability to serve patients. I therefore gently question whether we are in a position today to make a judgment that patients truly would have a choice at the end of life.
I thank him for his intervention, but I would say, as I have said previously, that people working in palliative care have a mixed range of views on this subject. I have met with palliative care doctors, and some are very supportive of a change in the law because of the suffering they have seen.
Will my hon. Friend give way on that particular point?
I am just going to make some progress, if I may. But, as I was saying, it is an either/or decision for us today: either we vote for the safe, effective, workable reform contained in this Bill, or we say that the status quo is acceptable.
Over recent months, I have heard hundreds of stories from people who have lost loved ones in deeply difficult and traumatic circumstances, along with many terminally   ill people themselves. I spent some time with some of these families yesterday. They are real people with real stories and they deserve to be heard.
Adil’s terminally ill father took his own life by buying drugs on the dark web. It was his third attempt, and Adil found him in a truly desperate state. He and his sister will never get over that night, nor the police investigation that followed. Katie waved her mum off as she made the lonely and costly journey to Switzerland, where she had a peaceful and dignified death. But the family had no chance to say a proper goodbye and her dad made the journey home grieving and alone.
Others have had to watch their loved ones die harrowing deaths despite receiving excellent end-of-life care. Warwick’s wife Ann, suffering from peritoneal cancer, had the maximum dose of sedative, but it was not enough to stop the choking and suffocation, and she begged him to help her put an end to her suffering. But he did not want her last memory to be of him stood over her with a pillow. There are many, many more such stories.
Perhaps most importantly, I have spoken to terminally ill people themselves. We have spent a lot of time talking about them, but not always with them. Pamela and Sophie both have terminal breast cancer, and they shared their stories yesterday. Pamela is a proud Christian who just wants to have choice when her time comes. Sophie, who is allergic to opioids, wants to ensure that her beautiful daughter has nothing but happy memories of their time together. Not supporting the Bill today is not a neutral act. It is a vote for the status quo. It fills me with despair to think that MPs could be here in another 10 years’ time hearing the same stories.
I thank my hon. Friend for giving way; she is being very kind. I came into this House supporting the principle of assisted dying, and I thought very carefully before voting against the Bill on Second Reading. There are differing views, but I want to ask my hon. Friend, before MPs put their name not to the principle of assisted dying but to this Bill specifically, why the vast majority of primary care doctors, geriatricians and groups representing people with disabilities, eating disorders and domestic violence are all opposed not to the principle but to this Bill specifically. Some people who are supportive of the principle of assisted dying do not support this specific Bill; can my hon. Friend explain their opposition?
I think we have covered that point already. These are not homogeneous groups of people; they have different views and opinions.
If we look at the inconsistencies in the current law, it just does not make sense. If someone with a terminal illness voluntarily stops eating and drinking, it is legal for them to starve themselves to death. A competent patient has the right to refuse foods and fluids even if they will die. The exercising of that right is sometimes proposed as an alternative to assisted dying. I suppose it could be argued that starving oneself to death is one way of taking control at the end of life, but it is a deeply traumatic experience for the person and their loved ones, and there are people here today who have direct experience of that.
Will my hon. Friend give way?
I will make some progress.
We have a system in which it legal for someone to starve themselves to death, which can take days or weeks, but where it is not legal for someone to seek assistance from a doctor to take an approved substance themselves to end their pain or suffering and take back control in their dying days. It is also legal in this country for someone to discharge themselves from medical care or refuse life-sustaining treatment such as ventilation, CPR or antibiotics, as long as they have the mental capacity to do so and are making the decision of their own accord, without harassment from anyone else. Colleagues might think that is fine, and I agree, but there is no requirement for two doctors, a psychiatrist, and a social worker, and there is no lawyer or judge. It is legal, yet what is being proposed in this Bill, with so many more safeguards and protections, is not. It simply does not make sense.
rose—
I am not going to take any more interventions, because lots of people want to speak.
Then there are the criminal offences that the Bill introduces—none of which exist now—including life imprisonment for anyone who induces another person to take the approved substance, and 14 years in prison for coercion, dishonesty or pressure. It is a robust process that goes further than any other piece of legislation in the world, and it is far safer and significantly more compassionate than what we have now.
If we look internationally, there are clear, well-established, safe and compassionate assisted dying laws in existence. On Tuesday I joined doctors from Australia who used three key words repeatedly: choice, control and relief. Dr Greg Mewett has 20 years of experience as a GP and 22 years as a palliative care physician, and he spoke about the thorough approach that he has taken to ensure safety and efficacy of the assisted dying process. Perhaps the most stand-out quote from that session came from Dr Jacky Davis, chair of Healthcare Professionals for Assisted Dying, who said that by introducing assisted dying,
“no more people will die but far fewer people will suffer”.
This is not a choice between living and dying. It is a choice for terminally ill people about how they die. I fully appreciate that some colleagues would never vote for any version of this Bill, and I am respectful of that despite disagreeing with them. However, I say to colleagues who are supportive of a change in the law but are hesitant about whether now is the time, that if we do not vote for a change in the law today, we will have many more years of heartbreaking stories from terminally ill people and their families, of pain and trauma—
Will my hon. Friend give way?
I am going to finish.
There will be stories of suicide attempts, post-traumatic stress disorder, lonely trips to Switzerland, police investigations, and everything else we have all heard of in recent months. As the Commission on Assisted Dying said in 2011, 14 years ago:
“The current legal status of assisted dying [in the UK] is inadequate and incoherent. It outsources a healthcare issue abroad, especially to Dignitas, instead of the Government and Parliament assuming responsibility.”
That was 14 years ago, and we are in exactly the same position today. Things have got to change.
As the Government’s impact assessment states, the Bill will improve equity of choice, ensuring that terminally ill adults from all socioeconomic backgrounds can access end-of-life options within a regulated and safe framework.
I will draw my comments to a close. There are essentially two ways in which we can look at the situation we are in. We can look at it through a legal lens. As legislators, we have a duty to change the law where it is failing, and when the last four Directors of Public Prosecutions tell us that the law needs to change, surely we have a duty to listen. We need scrutiny before people die, not after. Most importantly, there is the human lens, which is how I approach most things. Giving dying people choice about how they die is about compassion, control, dignity and bodily autonomy. Surely we should all have the right—
Will my hon. Friend give way?
I am going to finish shortly.
Surely we should all have the right to decide what happens to our bodies and decide when enough is enough. Of course, giving people the right to choose does not take away the right not to choose.
Today, we can vote with either our hearts or with our heads, but either way, we should end up in the same Lobby. On a compassionate, human level, and as responsible lawmakers, we should support this desperately needed reform, which is rigorous, practical and safe, and which is rooted in the principles that should underpin any legislation: compassion, justice and human dignity.
I have no doubt that the vast majority in this House—probably every single hon. and right hon. Member—is sympathetic to the underlying motivation of the Bill, which is to ease suffering in others and try to avoid suffering where possible. For the most part, the debate, both in this Chamber and in Committee, has been good natured and conducted in a way that we can be proud of.
There have been wider questions about the motivations of both the proponents and the opponents of the Bill. Although this is not about any individual one of us, I think it is only fair that, because some questions have been asked, I put a few things on the record about my own position. I do not come at this from a religious point of view—I am an atheist; I am a humanist. My position is driven by my concerns about the practicalities of the Bill, rather than any religious viewpoint.
It has been suggested, particularly when people talk about their experience of talking to people who have lost loved ones or who are themselves terminally ill—this has been said to me on a number of occasions—that if we had seen someone suffering, we would agree with the Bill. I have seen someone suffering. Earlier this year, my closest friend died painfully of oesophageal cancer, and I was with him in the final weeks of his life.
I come at this from a position neither of faith, nor of ignorance, and I hope that the House will take those factors into consideration when I say what I am about to say.
On the TV last night, they did a survey of GPs. The relationship between a GP and a patient is incredibly close. When our children and grandchildren come into the world, our GP is involved. When a GP has to deliver a diagnosis of terminal illness, there is fear not just in the eyes of the patient but in the eyes of the GP—the doctor, the friend we all have. Does the right hon. Gentleman recognise the importance of today’s debate and vote? It will change forever that relationship of trust between the GP and the patient; it will do so in a negative way and it will never change ever again.
I will refer to the hon. Gentleman’s point later in my speech. I will try not to take too many interventions, because many people have not had the chance to speak in the debate and I want to give them the chance to do so.
On Second Reading I made the point that we need to think about the detail of the Bill and not just vote in accordance with the broad principles. I made the point that, because it is a private Member’s Bill, the opportunity to change it fundamentally is limited, and so we have an enhanced duty to get it right first time. We were told on Second Reading that a lot of the concerns, worries and detailed questions would be resolved in Committee. We were promised the gold standard: a judicially underpinned set of protections and safeguards. Those protections did not make it through Committee. I have also heard people say, where there are still problems, issues and concerns, that the Lords will do that work. But none of us should think that it is right to subcontract our job to the other place.
We are making an incredibly important and fundamental change, as  the hon. Member for Strangford (Jim Shannon)  highlighted, in the relationship between medical professionals and those they serve. If we make that change, we will introduce a small but permanent question mark in the minds of every patient, particularly a patient who is discussing a serious illness or terminal diagnosis: “What is this medical professional expecting of me? What are they thinking? Where is their head?” Whereas, with the situation we have at the moment, the patient knows that the medical professional is dutybound to do no harm, and to preserve life and dignity wherever possible.
Next Tuesday will be the second anniversary of my sister’s death. Three weeks prior to her death, we took her to hospital because she had a blood infection. Despite agreeing to allow her into intensive care to sort out that blood infection, the consultant then decided that she should not go, because she had a brain tumour and was going to die. She was going to die, but not at that moment. I am sure, Mr Speaker, that you can understand that a very big row ensued. I won that row: she was made well, she came home, and she died peacefully. What does the right hon. Gentleman think would happen in identical circumstances if this Bill passes?
The hon. Lady asks me to speculate about a set of circumstances that are personal and painful. I suspect that she and I both know that the outcome could have been very different, and that the moments she had with her sister, just like those I had with my dear friend, might have been lost.
We have to recognise that this is an important moment. While I respect  the hon. Member for Spen Valley (Kim Leadbeater) , I disagree with her assessment that it is now or never; that it is this Bill or no Bill; and that a vote against it on Third Reading is a vote to maintain the status quo. None of those things is true. There will be plenty of opportunities. Indeed, we are dutybound, stimulated by this debate—which is why I do not criticise the hon. Lady for bringing forward the Bill—to have a serious conversation about palliative care. Many people will say that these are not conflicting or contradictory positions. But—and I will crack on because otherwise you will tell me off, Mr Speaker—we know that there could be circumstances where assisted dying would be on a statutory basis and the provision of palliative care would not.
We also have to address the point that we can all pray in aid individuals and institutions to reinforce our positions on this, but we cannot subcontract our decisions. Yes, we can fish around for people to come up with the perfect quote to reinforce our arguments, but another five minutes on Wikipedia, Google, or with friends of ours in the medical profession will find another voice that opposes that. Yes, it is a mixed picture in the medical professions, but I am struck by the number of professional bodies that are neutral on the topic of assisted dying in general but opposed to the provisions within this Bill in particular. We cannot just say, “They are neutral on assisted dying, and therefore this particular vehicle has to progress.”
We carry a responsibility—it is what we are sent here to do—and we need to take it very seriously. We must be rigorous on the specific details in the Bill. Just like the hon. Member for Spen Valley, I do not have time to go through every single argument that was had on Second Reading, in Committee and beyond, but in order to ensure that we are rigorous, there are three fundamental questions that we should ask ourselves—not lean on our friends and colleagues, but ask ourselves—and ensure that we answer fully and honestly.
The right hon. Gentleman will remember that, in 2021, he and I worked cross-party on identifying inequalities within certain communities and on getting them to come forward for the covid vaccination. Does he agree that one question we parliamentarians need to ask ourselves is this: how is it right that some communities are denied basic healthcare within the current system; how is it right that some communities do not have access to good palliative care; how is it right that some communities still mistrust the medical profession; and how is it right that we are not listening to their voices?
The hon. Lady makes an incredibly important point, and I will touch on that briefly in my remarks. I am minded to take no more interventions, because otherwise I will be stealing time from others.
There are three questions we need to ask. First, are we happy for this Bill—not for the principle, but for this Bill as drafted—to become law? Many of the elements that I have already discussed are concerning. In the criteria set out, medical professionals do not need to seek deeper motivation. We have said there is not a real choice between palliative care and assisted dying, because one will have a statutory underpinning and the other will not. As I say, the “gold standard” protections were lost in Committee, because a number of professional bodies and—
Will the right hon. Member give way?
I need to make progress.
A number of professional bodies have said they do not have the capacity. They do not have enough people to fill the slots that this Bill demands of them.
Secondly, in terms of fundamental changes, are hon. and right hon. Members genuinely happy to write the blank cheque that this Bill demands? It is normal for the Secretary of State of a Government Department to decide when a piece of legislation comes into force, and they make their decision based on the state’s ability to deliver that legislation. Commencement dates matter; they are not just some arbitrary dates on a piece of paper. I understand people’s desire to ensure that this cannot be lost down the back of the sofa when it comes to Government work, but when the people on whom we would rely to deliver this Bill say that they are not ready and that they do not feel that they will be ready—they do not have enough people and they do not have enough capacity, so they will have to take resource from current provisions to move across to this provision, which will be driven by a statutory requirement and a locked-in commencement date—we should listen. If the people who are going to make this work—and work as well as we hope it will, if it becomes legislation—say that they are not confident that they can make it happen, we should be very careful about demanding that they prioritise this. That is what this legislation says: they will prioritise this above any other work that they might otherwise do.
Thirdly—the hon. Member for Spen Valley hinted at this, and I mentioned it in an intervention in an earlier stage of the Bill—on coercion, on the pressure that individuals put on themselves and on medical professionals raising the issue, we know that there are inequalities in health provision already, none of which will be addressed by the Bill. There are certain communities, and certain people in those communities, particularly women, who are overly deferential to men and to men in authority. Can we genuinely say that we have no fear whatsoever about a potentially vulnerable woman sitting in front of a medical professional who raises assisted dying? Even if they do not imply that it is the right thing for her to do, the very fact that they bring it up will have a significant influence on that woman’s thinking. We cannot believe that the effect will be completely neutral across all communities.
With the safeguards that have been put in the Bill, there will be a panel that looks at those issues and  asks questions like, “Has your doctor persuaded you to do this?” Do we honestly think that a social worker, psychiatrist or lawyer is totally incapable of finding coercion? That is exactly what the panel is there to do, and that is exactly what those safeguards will provide.
The hon. Lady makes an important point, but I refer her to my second question. Those bodies say that they do not have the people to populate those panels, yet that is what the commencement date demands. The principle of having a person or group of people to protect against coercion is important—I am talking not just about coercion, but about how people perceive people in authority—but royal colleges and social workers have told us that they do not believe they will be ready to put those guardrails in place by the commencement date. We should listen to them.
This is an important debate that has stimulated an important conversation, which demands our full attention, but I do not believe that the Bill is ready to go to the other place. It is interesting that there are both proponents and opponents of the Bill who hope that the Lords will make significant changes to the Bill. That should surely set off alarm bells.
Ultimately, because the Bill is such a fundamental change, we need to ensure that there is an enhanced level of scrutiny of its detail. We all want to avoid and alleviate suffering wherever possible, but I do not believe that we have had the opportunity to get the Bill into the right shape. That is why I will oppose Third Reading, and I encourage others to do likewise.
Order. After the two opening speeches, we will now have a five-minute limit, and I hope that Members will restrict themselves to up to five minutes. The Mother of the House will now give us a very good example.
This may be the most fateful Bill that we discuss this Parliament. It is literally a matter of life and death. I have heard talk today of the injustices of the current situation. What could be more unjust than someone losing their life because of poorly drafted legislation?
We hear about panels. The people talking about panels presumably have not had much to do with them. I would not put my life, or the life of anyone dear to me, in the hands of a panel of officials. I stress, right from the beginning, that it is perfectly possible to support assisted dying, as I do, but not be prepared to vote for this Bill. There is so much that is problematic about it.
First, as I believe is widely understood, there has not been enough time to debate the Bill. Secondly, a Bill of this seriousness should be given more time.
Does the right hon. Lady find it rather peculiar that the previous Parliament spent 746 hours discussing the death of a fox and about 98 hours discussing the death of fellow humans?
There has been a lot of talk about there being no evidence of coercion, but within the family, the most powerful coercion is silence: it is the failure to answer when a question is put. If police cannot spot coercion in domestic violence, how can they be expected to spot coercion in assisted dying?
The Royal College of Pathologists and the former chief coroner have pointed out that without a role for a coroner, the Bill raises the possibility of foul play. When an amendment was tabled in Committee to deal with that, however, it was opposed. The Bill would allow private for-profit contractors to run an assisted dying service with no profit cap and no transparency, but when an amendment was tabled in Committee to deal with that point, it was opposed.
We have heard—and we will hear over and over again in this debate—about choice. This Bill may produce choice for those of us, like almost everybody in this House, who have for the entirety of their adult life been confident in dealing with authority and institutions, but even then, the Bill would need amendments. But what choice does the Bill hold for someone who, all their life, has lacked agency, particularly in a family context, which may be particularly the case in certain cultures and communities? And what choice does the Bill offer to those who lack access to good palliative care?
As the former Prime Minister Gordon Brown has put it, our law should not
“focus on the few who wish for assisted dying and do too little to support the majority of those facing their final days who want—and deserve—access to the best of palliative care.”
What choice is it for those who think that, because their doctor raises it with them at all, they are being guided in that direction? An amendment that might have addressed that issue was rejected in Committee. It is a possibility that proponents of the Bill do not take seriously at all, but anyone who knows how institutions work should be watchful of it.
I came to this House to be a voice for the voiceless—that has not always been favoured by my own leadership, but that is why I came to the House. Who could be more voiceless than somebody who is in their sick bed and believes that they are dying? I ask Members in this debate to speak up for the voiceless one more time. There is no doubt that if the Bill is passed in its current form, there will be people among the most vulnerable and marginalised in our society who lose their lives unnecessarily. I therefore implore the House to reject this Bill—not because I am opposed to assisted dying in principle, but because my concern is for vulnerable and marginalised persons and communities.
rose—
Order. I reiterate the admonition that Mr Speaker has offered. This is one of the most far-reaching considerations that the House—even those of us who have been here for a very long time—can remember. It is understandable that a lot of Members will wish to take part, from across the House and on both sides of the argument, but looking around, it is quite clear that we cannot accommodate everybody. This means there will inevitably be a considerable number of interventions. All I would say, gently, is that interventions will be taken into account when considering the order of priority in which Members are called.
I start off by saying a huge thank you to  the hon. Member for Spen Valley (Kim Leadbeater)  for the extraordinary amount of work she has done across this whole debate.
This is the first time I have spoken in this debate, and, like many Members whose speeches I have heard, I come to it through personal experience. I have heard many stories of people whose relations have died; in my case, it was my mother who died. In 2012, she was diagnosed with pancreatic cancer. My father-in-law was a consultant, so I phoned him up and asked what that meant, and he said that she had a 90% chance of dying. I was prepared for it, but eventually the time came when I got the call saying that her health had started to deteriorate, so I went down to see her—I spoke to the Whips, and took time off work here—and watched the start of the decline from something as painful and difficult as pancreatic cancer, which, as those who have witnessed it will know, was not a nice moment.
My mother was not frightened of dying at all. She would talk about it; she knew that she was going to die. However, she was terrified of the pain, and on many occasions, she asked me and Caroline, my wife, if we could make it end. We could not, of course. She had very, very good care from the NHS—the nurses came twice a day, she was on a morphine driver, and the GP came to see her, so she was looked after well. However, as she deteriorated, we could see that she was in indignity and a huge amount of pain, until eventually, she died. It was, of course, not one of the happiest moments of my life.
Contrary to that experience, two or three years ago, I found myself going to the memorial service of one of my constituents, who was a truly wonderful person. She, too, had died of pancreatic cancer, but because she had been in Spain at the time—she spent quite a lot of time in Spain with her husband—she had the opportunity to go through the state-provided assisted dying programme that is provided there. I spoke to her widower very briefly, and it was fascinating to talk to him about it: he said it was an extraordinary, incredibly sad thing to have gone through, but that it was something that made her suffering much less. It was almost a sort of quiet Sunday afternoon when it happened.
I saw those two people—my mother, who had the indignity and the pain and the suffering that she was terrified of, and my constituent, who had the opportunity to end it in a dignified way—and when I came to this debate, I was absolutely convinced that this was the right thing to do. I have spent the past six or seven months engaging as hard as I could with those who I hoped would be able to persuade me of a different decision—to try to persuade me that I was wrong in my assumptions. I have spoken to a huge number of people; I have joined in meetings with campaigners; I have read every email that has come in; and I have spoken to doctors and religious leaders, and I have yet to be persuaded that this is a bad thing to do.
There has been a huge amount of debate here—over 100 hours of debate, when we add it all together. There have been loads of amendments, and people on both sides of the debate have been incredibly thoughtful, but are we possibly getting rid of the good in trying to find the perfect? I do not know—I am not the world’s greatest legislator—but having listened to these debates, and given what I have seen at first hand, at the end of the day, I can only go through the Aye Lobby to support the hon. Member for Spen Valley in all this extraordinary hard work. The time has come when we need to end   suffering, where suffering can be put aside, rather than trying to do something super-perfect and allowing too many more people to suffer in the future.
I start by thanking my hon. Friend  the Member for Spen Valley (Kim Leadbeater) , all the Members who served on the Committee and, indeed, the whole House for the approach that everyone has taken to this Bill.
I want to make it clear that I came to this Bill with an open mind. Like many, I supported it in principle at first glance, but this debate is no longer about the principle of assisted death—that is not the decision before us today; it is not the issue on which we will walk through the Lobby when we decide to vote for or against this Bill. Our responsibility in this place is to make sure that the Bill is safe, workable and effective. That is the test that will lead us to vote for or against the Bill today. As the Bill stands, it presents a public safety issue.
I spoke to the hon. Lady beforehand, and I understand her concerns. They are the same concerns I have, on behalf of those who have anorexia, those with mental health conditions, troubled people—those who would be vulnerable when this idea was presented to them. Does she think, like I do, that this Bill does not in any way address the issue of those who are vulnerable, when it comes to assisted dying?
I thank the hon. Member for his intervention. I think he might have read some of my speech, which I will carry on with.
I will set out why the Bill is not safe, and speak about the two amendments that I tabled: amendment 14, which we have nodded through today, and amendment 38, which we will not get the chance to vote on. Amendment 14 dealt with the issue of voluntarily stopping eating and drinking, or VSED, which has been used as a “bridge” to assisted death in other jurisdictions. I am pleased that my hon. Friend the Member for Spen Valley accepted that amendment, but let me be very clear: this does not close the anorexia loophole—that was the subject of another amendment. Voluntarily stopping eating and drinking is not what happens to people with anorexia. People with anorexia stop eating and drinking because they have a psychiatric illness. Those are two categorically different issues. I must make it absolutely clear that even though amendment 14 has passed today, it does not address concerns about anorexia or close that loophole.
Members in the other place are already raising the concern that, because this is a private Member’s Bill, they do not believe that they can provide all the necessary safeguards if we give a Third Reading today to a Bill that is not safe to be delivered to the public. At least 60 women with anorexia in multiple countries have died by assisted death when they needed treatment, not help to die. Every one of them was assessed to have capacity by two doctors.
Will my hon. Friend give way?
I will make some progress.
Hundreds of eating disorder experts, doctors, lawyers, charities, family members and people with lived experience urged Parliament to close this loophole and support amendment 38. As a Committee, we failed to heed their warning. We have now learned that the one remaining amendment that could protect people with eating disorders will not even be voted on.
Our responsibility is to make the Bill safe. We know what happens when politicians think they know better than the experts. Let us make it clear: the Royal College of Psychiatrists, the Royal College of Physicians, the Royal College of Pathologists, palliative care doctors, the British Geriatrics Society, almost every eating disorder charity and almost every disabled people’s group do not support this Bill. That is not because they do not believe in the principle; they are warning us about the dangers of this Bill, and of getting this wrong.
Our job is not to be activists—to fight until our last breath for the principle, whatever shape or form it is delivered in. Of course we believe in causes—that is why each and every one of us is in Parliament—but we legislators must listen to the experts, heed the evidence, scrutinise and debate the ideas that are before us, and deliver for our constituents laws that are safe, workable and effective. We have a proud history; the likes of Florence Nightingale—the lady with the lamp—broke every barrier possible to heal the wounded, provide care for the vulnerable and reduce the chance of death. Those are the principles that our great NHS was founded on. We must ask ourselves whether those fundamental principles will still be intact if the Bill passes. Will they be there to protect those who face a postcode lottery in healthcare and palliative care, the most vulnerable, and those who have faced the greatest hardships in life and feel like a burden? Will those principles be there to protect those who feel like giving up, but whom we could help back up and push towards a better life? Instead, we will be giving them a way to give up, even if they could have survived.
This is the question for all Members: what is the margin of error that we are willing to risk today when it comes to something as serious as death? I urge Members to vote against this Bill.
The Mother of the House,  the right hon. Member for Hackney North and Stoke Newington (Ms Abbott) , is absolutely right to stress the importance of giving a voice to the voiceless. That is a role that many Members in this House take deeply seriously, including proponents of this Bill. No one is more voiceless in this debate than those terminally ill adults who suffered painful, traumatic and undignified deaths under the current system, as well as their families. Nothing that I could say makes the case for this Bill—not just the principle, but this Bill—more powerfully than this letter from my constituent, which is adapted to protect her anonymity:
“Following a diagnosis of an aggressive tumour, my partner’s final days were agony. He struggled to breathe and swallow and lost his ability to speak. He was incontinent & developed painful bedsores. He repeatedly asked for help to end his life. I entered his room to see that he had stuffed yards of his top sheet into his mouth in an attempt to suffocate. It was the most distressing sight and one I will never forget. I live with this image and cannot share it with our children. This could have been avoided with an assisted dying law.”
I agree with the hon. Member that people in those circumstances should be able to seek an assisted death. However, the Bill allows someone to say to a doctor on a panel, “I want to go because I do not want to be a burden,” even if they are not suffering at that point in time. It also allows them to say, “I want to go now, so that my family have a larger inheritance.” Why should we support a Bill this afternoon that allows those things?
The hon. Member will be aware that the Bill creates a criminal offence that would punish those who would coerce a relative in such a way. [Hon. Members: “Self-coerce.”] There are folks who talk about the concept of self-coercion, but others would frame such a decision as a choice. Self-coercion is a choice.
My constituent said,
“This could have been avoided with an assisted dying law. My partner was from a jurisdiction where such a law exists. A relative used that law. They were able to gather their family, say a proper goodbye and die in peace and with dignity before losing all physical and mental capacity.”
Will the hon. Member give way on that point?
I will not, to give others the chance to speak after me.
My constituent went on to say,
“The procedure to enable this was protracted and had several safeguards which would prevent much of the concerns we hear about by those opposed. I urge you to support this bill”—
the Bill, and not just the principle. I will do so because the status quo is completely unacceptable and must be reformed.
As a young doctor, I would have found the measures that we are debating completely unconscionable, but now that I am an old doctor, I feel sure that this is an essential change. That is because of what I have seen over 45 years in hospitals. Our patients are at the centre of my thoughts as we consider this profound change.
We must of course invest in palliative care, and we have some of the best palliative care in the world in this country. Some will say that there are no limits to the comfort that expert palliative care can deliver, but that has not been my observation, particularly as I think about some of my patients with advanced, disfiguring head and neck cancers, and about the terrible loss of dignity and autonomy that I have seen. That is what people fear, and that is why I believe that we are right to give people a choice—a final autonomous choice.
I applaud the Bill Committee, and thank the many witnesses who contributed, for this is not easy work. The House has spent hours debating the amendments. The panel of the legal expert, the social worker and the psychiatrist will ensure oversight and scrutiny, and I have no doubt that this is better than a single judge, no matter how distinguished or wise. Family circumstances, free will and mental state will all be considered. I do not think we will see coercion to undergo assisted dying; families are more likely to talk patients out of it.
I call this a Bill to assist people who are dying. The measures are not for people who are not dying. People who are terminally ill may live for a long time. They are not yet dying, and the measures are for them until they are. All of us must make the very best of every day, whether our lives be long or short. Of course, that is especially true for those with a terminal diagnosis.
The vulnerable must be protected, and I believe that the Bill will indeed protect them—people who are disabled, and who have mental health disorders. Profound sadness as our lives are ending is quite normal, and clinical depression should be treated, but my observation is that the patients we are talking about are clear-headed and very rational. The idea that we risk opening a floodgate or some sort of mission creep is quite wrong. People will have a choice, and will make arrangements to be used only if needed. That will give final peace of mind—it is a final insurance policy.
Let me come back to the patients I have treated over my long career, and to the wise words of the nurse who has been my compassionate colleague for many years. She said this was an essential change. There was the matron who recalled the carotid blow-out of her patient as a student many years ago—an image that never left her. There is the absolute sanctity of human life, but we are not dealing with a choice between life and death; we are dealing with death or death. There is also the sanctity of human dignity, and fundamental to that is surely choice. Who are we to deny that to the dying?
Many Members present will look forward to the day when it is possible for people in this country to die in peace, with dignity and at a time of their choosing. The opportunity to bring that about is closer than ever before, but it can happen only if Members vote against the Bill today. The express will of the House, as reflected in the Second Reading vote; the momentum generated by the Bill; and the support of the Prime Minister, as we understand it, to change the law have created a moment when it is possible to grasp the chance to bring in assisted dying legislation, but I warn Members that if this Bill passes, the case for assisted dying will be fatally undermined, and it will put back their cause for a generation.
I have sat through Committee and Report, listened to the oral evidence and participated in the debates. This Bill, if it passes, will be challenged in the courts. It will be subject to endless attempts to amend it in Parliament. It will be difficult to implement effectively, and ultimately it will lose the confidence of the public.
It was immensely challenging to properly debate the Bill in Committee, because we frequently found ourselves needing an understanding of medical practice or points of law that MPs are not typically expert in. We spent many hours, for example, debating whether or not the provisions of the Mental Capacity Act 2005 were sufficient for someone who was making the decision to die. Of course, we consulted experts, and some said the provisions were sufficient, some said they were not. I do not believe that this particular decision is one that politicians are best placed to make.
Will the hon. Lady give way?
I am sorry, but I will make progress. We would all have been better served by asking a team of experts to evaluate the evidence, draw on their professional experience and come to a settled consensus among themselves on this point about mental capacity and, likewise, the questions we had about how best to approach anorexia within the context of assisted dying and whether the Bill provides a suitable framework for the provision and control of drugs designed for the ending of a life.
These are not political decisions. They have, however, been decided by politicians, and we have approached them in our usual adversarial way, where the right answer is not the one arrived at after careful thought, consideration and consultation, but the one that can muster the most votes. We have therefore reached a most unsatisfactory conclusion.
This legislation imposes duties and responsibilities on professionals who do not think them compatible with their expert practice. It was amended in Committee to require that a panel approve an application for assisted dying, and that the panel include a psychiatrist. The Royal College of Psychiatrists has stated that it opposes this legislation.
Will the hon. Lady give way?
I will not give way, sorry. Assisted dying under this legislation cannot be implemented without psychiatrists, but they would be acting outside the advice and guidance of their professional body.
Will my hon. Friend give way?
I am not giving way. Will there be sufficient psychiatrists prepared to implement the provisions of this legislation, against the advice of their professional body, to ensure that enough panels can be convened for the purpose of facilitating assisted dying? It is hard to see how there could be.
Will my hon. Friend give way?
I am not giving way. By contrast, many decisions are expressly reserved for politicians. Should the limited resources of the NHS be used to deliver an assisted dying service, or should it be possible to offer the service as a profit-making enterprise? What information should be collected and reported about assisted dying? Who should oversee and regulate its practitioners? Members of Parliament are to have no say over any of those matters at all. Those are all powers to be reserved to the Secretary of State, to be decided behind closed doors. Once again, this legislation grants these responsibilities to people who do not want them.
Neither the current Health Secretary nor the current Justice Secretary are supporters of this Bill. After today, the House of Commons will be shut out of further decision making on this Bill, even though many of the decisions still to be made are rightfully ours to make. The lack of professional consensus or acceptance of the requirements of this legislation, coupled with a lack of political scrutiny of many of its more important provisions, creates an unstable foundation upon which to build an assisted dying service. For such a service to succeed, it  needs professionals willing to deliver it, who can have confidence that they are acting within the law and will be supported by their professional peers and by society at large. I do not see how this legislation can deliver that.
It is instructive to compare this piece of legislation with the Abortion Act 1967. That, too, was a private Member’s Bill, brought to this House by the Liberal MP David Steel, but it was preceded by a medical advisory committee chaired by the president of the Royal College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists, which approved the Bill. The professionals who would be needed to enact the legislation had indicated their support for the Bill before it reached the Commons. The Bill only delegated one power to the Secretary of State. The legislation was hotly debated then as now, but once it was passed, it came into force within six months.
Remarkably, with the exception of amendments required to bring it into line with successive Human Fertilisation and Embryology Acts and to extend its provisions to Northern Ireland, the provisions that the Abortion Act brought into law have remained almost entirely unchanged in 58 years—until just this week, in fact. The careful consideration of the issues that took place before the legislation came to the Commons, combined with the fact that all its provisions were included within the primary legislation to be debated and voted on in one go, has enabled a settled consensus to develop around abortion provision in this country, in contrast to other jurisdictions. It has enabled vulnerable women to seek the help they need and given healthcare workers the confidence and support they require to meet those needs. That is what we need, if we want to deliver a successful assisted dying service, and this legislation cannot deliver that.
If Members want assisted dying, vote against this Bill and make the most of the moment to press for a better approach that can deliver a sustainable framework, accepted and supported by the medical profession, and in which the public can have confidence. If people’s lives are going to be ended prematurely as a result of this legislation that we pass, we cannot take risks. We cannot afford to pass this Bill.
This is my first speech in this Chamber since the general election, and if I am honest, I wish I was not speaking in this debate, as I wish this legislation was not being put forward. I have not always been opposed to assisted dying. Indeed, in 2015, I voted in favour of the Bill put forward by Rob Marris MP, but that was before I served four years as shadow Minister for disabled people. During that time, I spoke to hundreds of disabled people and the organisations that support them. They were, and remain, extremely fearful of assisted dying.
I took on that role at the start of the covid pandemic. Disabled people were disproportionately affected by the pandemic. Nearly six in every 10 people who died were disabled. Many had “do not resuscitate” notices unilaterally pasted on their medical records, without them being informed. It made them fear for their lives. It made them fear that the authorities thought that their lives were worth less. It also made them fearful of what would happen if assisted dying was brought forward. That is why Disability Rights UK and other disabled  people’s organisations have moved from the neutral position they had in 2015 to a position of opposition now.
I do not claim that every disabled person opposes assisted dying, but I do claim that the vast majority of disabled people and their organisations oppose it. They need the health and social care system fixing first. They want us as parliamentarians to assist them to live, not to die.
Disabled people’s voices matter in this debate, and yet as I have watched the Bill progress, the absence of disabled people’s voices has been astonishing. They have wanted to engage. Indeed, they have been crying out to be included, yet the engagement has been negligible. I believe that only one disabled people’s organisation was given the opportunity to provide evidence to the Committee. Furthermore, throughout Committee and at the initial publication stage of the Bill, accessible formats were not available. A large-print version of the Bill was published several weeks after the original, but no other formats, such as easy read and British Sign Language, have been made available. These are basic things that we should be doing when consulting on such important pieces of legislation, making it accessible so that everyone’s voices and views can be heard.
Many of those expected to deliver this legislation also do not want it. They believe that it could destroy the doctor-patient relationship. The experts have all been clear. The Royal College of Psychiatrists, the Royal College of Physicians, GPs, disability charities, mental health charities and domestic abuse charities have all warned that the safeguards in the Bill are insufficient and will put vulnerable people in harm’s way.
I will finish by saying that I am not opposed to the principle of assisted dying, but until we have a system that supports the right to life, I cannot support it. Until we ensure that all safeguards are in place, I cannot support it. And until the vast majority of disabled people and their organisations support the legislation that is being brought forward, I cannot support it. We are not voting on principles today. This is real and we have to protect those people who are susceptible to coercion, who already feel like society does not value them, who often feel like a burden to the state, society and their family. I urge anyone in this Chamber who has any doubts that this Bill does not protect them, who has any worries and concerns: please do not vote for it today. Let us fix our NHS, social care and wider society first and then consider this topic again in the future, when the time is right.
I have not spoken so far in these debates, but I have listened and attended on pretty much all occasions. I am moved to speak today because I am concerned. This is the point that  the hon. Member for Lewisham North (Vicky Foxcroft)  made, but what is this debate today about? This debate is not about the principle of what we believe in when it comes to assisted dying—whether we are opposed to it or in favour of it. We had that debate on Second Reading. As the Mother of the House,  the right hon. Member for Hackney North and Stoke Newington (Ms Abbott) , made very clear—in what I must say was an excellent speech—and as others  have too, today’s Third Reading debate is about what we are about to pass on to the House of Lords, which will become law. And the single question we have to ask ourselves is: is this genuinely workable now?
The hon. Member for Spen Valley (Kim Leadbeater) , who moved the motion, knows that I have a high regard for her—I have worked with her on other things—but I honestly have to say that I simply cannot see how we in this House can pass this piece of legislation through to the other House, in the vague hope that somehow it will do better than us and make changes such that it will become a workable piece of legislation, and that is because this is a private Member’s Bill. If a Government were to introduce a Bill like this, we would see a great deal more input and a huge amount more checking with all those bodies. For example, we were told on Second Reading that the safeguards and protections we were sending to Committee would somehow become the most robust and strongest in the world. In fact, in Committee they got weakened, not strengthened, and that is the problem in all this.
Will the right hon. Gentleman give way on that point?
If the hon. Lady will forgive me, I understand that many others want to speak, so I am going make a bit of progress if she does not mind.
The other important point, when we think about what our vote today is all about, is the behaviour of the professional bodies that have been consulted on this, which have come out for the most part very strongly opposed to this legislation.
Every medical college has retained a neutral position. By my count—[Interruption.] I will go on. By my count, two or three medical colleges have said expressly that they welcome specific amendments to the Bill, and all MPs will have received the letter from senior psychiatrists, who include a former president of the college, who said:
“We believe the draft legislation is workable, safe and compassionate.”
A number of safeguards have been included in the Bill. Does the right hon. Gentleman recognise that additional safeguards have been included and have been welcomed by various royal colleges?
I simply do not agree with the hon. Lady on that reading. The professional bodies are completely divided, and most have come out in opposition to the nature of this legislation. It is all very well for her to say that, and I appreciate her right to say it, and I hope she gets to speak later, but I just do not agree with it.
As was said earlier in the debate, the whole issue of mental capacity is not dealt with properly in the structure of this Bill. The hon. Member for Spen Valley talked about this earlier, and she was absolutely right. Even the amendments that were proposed were not always accepted, and we are left now with some areas that will be deeply troubling. We simply cannot accept that the Lords must make these changes for us, for we have to make them first. That is the key.
The one big important area here—I absolutely agree with my constituency neighbour the Health Secretary on this—is that we talk a lot about choice in dying, but  how is that choice informed if palliative care in the UK is simply not good enough? Again, the Mother of the House spoke about this, and there are so many people affected: the most vulnerable; the people furthest away from institutions; and the ones who understand least how to work the health service or their local authority, and who rely mostly on us to try and break through. They will be faced with this problem more than almost anybody else, because they look in fear on these institutions.
I helped to set up a children’s hospice, which I think was the first in London. There have been many more since, but children’s hospices, as we know, are really badly treated by Government spending, pretty much no matter who is in power. They have less than anybody else. Haven House, which I helped to set up and raise money for, has given a very strong quote, which I think represents much of what most of those hospices have said:
“We would fully agree that a change in the law would have very significant consequences for the delivery of palliative care services and would be challenging given the existing resource pressures that we face. The hospice sector is experiencing significant financial pressures and the exceptional palliative care services we provide are not financially sustainable. The introduction of assisted dying would create new and demanding requirements for palliative care services and hospices in particular. It is therefore vital, whether or not the current legislation is passed, that the government takes urgent action to resolve”
this matter.
That is the case today. We cannot just say, “Well, that’s not our problem. Palliative care can be changed.” The trouble is that we have been unable to make the necessary changes to palliative care because we take such parti pris positions. That is the problem we face.
I will end with this. I will vote against the Bill, mostly because I believe it is fundamentally unworkable and will lead to huge problems. We have seen what has happened elsewhere internationally—Canada, Oregon and various other places—where legislation slides and slides again as more and more amendments have to be made because these things are not workable. To those who have any doubt, I simply say this. This is Third Reading; it is not Second Reading—it is not an “in principle” debate. We had that debate, and now we have to decide whether we should send this unworkable piece of legislation to another place, which is unelected, to make the decision for us because we cannot come to a conclusion. We cannot let this go through.
I rise to speak in support of the Bill on Third Reading, because at its very heart are terminally ill adults: people who are dying; people who have less than six months to live; people who have tried to stay alive, to beat a terrible disease with expert medical treatment, but to no avail. Now they face the inevitable: that they will die. In fact, that is the only thing any of us know we will ever do, really.
I am sure that most of us think about and desire a peaceful, pain-free death where we slip off in our sleep at a ripe old age, having lived a good life, but the reality is that all of us and all our citizens—those for whom we legislate in this place—could face a painful and undignified  death. That is why I believe that in the 21st century, like a growing number of other countries, we should change the law to permit choice at the end of life—or rather, choice towards the end of death—so that dying people can opt to have a death in the manner of their choosing and have an element of control over those last days.
YouGov polling published yesterday again showed that the public—the citizens we serve—back it too, with 75% supporting assisted dying in principle and 73% supporting the Bill as it stands. As a co-sponsor of the Bill, and having served on the Bill Committee, I am pleased that it is had more scrutiny, challenge and debate than almost any other piece of legislation—over 100 hours, in fact.
Will the hon. Member give way?
I am sorry, but we are short of time.
The changes that have been made, including many proposed by Members who do not support a change in the law but which have been adopted by the promoter of the Bill, my hon. Friend  the Member for Spen Valley (Kim Leadbeater) , as well as those proposed during the process she has led in response to evidence submitted during the scrutiny process have led to a better Bill. The Bill has greater safeguards for more vulnerable people, with mandatory training requirements, including in relation to coercion and capacity. The Bill ensures judicial oversight of decision making by a range of experts, including psychiatrists, social workers and senior legal professionals. The Bill will set out statutory protections for those workers who do not wish to take part in the assisted dying process on the basis of conscience, and quite right too.
The Bill will provide for one of the tightest, safest assisted dying laws in the world. Importantly, the Bill has compassion at its core by affording dying people choice at the end of life. I thank every one of my constituents who shared their views with me, whether for or against a change in the law. I particularly thank all those who have disagreed with me, because good democracy and the right to disagree respectfully is hugely important; perhaps it is a debate for another time.
I also thank all those who have shared their personal stories of loved ones’ deaths, some brutal, painful and traumatic—a stark reminder that the status quo is simply unacceptable. Others have shared experiences with loved ones who, in other jurisdictions, such as Australia, were able to have a peaceful death, surrounded by loved ones and at a time of their choosing.
As I come to a close, although not everyone would want to choose an assisted death, I believe that everyone should have the opportunity to choose one if they so wish. It really is time that this House takes the important, compassionate and humane step towards making that a reality by voting for the Terminally Ill Adults (End of Life) Bill.
That was a four-minute speech—thank you very much. I now call the Father of the House.
I have served for many years with  the right hon. Member for Hackney North and Stoke Newington (Ms Abbott)  and, dare I say it, we have not agreed on everything over the years, but we have published a few articles on this topic. Those articles have always started with the fundamental principle of the NHS. Some of us—maybe myself included—have been rather critical of the NHS over the years, but at least when we go into the NHS, we know that everybody is really trying their best to preserve life. That is the fundamental principle.
The reason why the right hon. Lady and I both oppose the Bill is that, as has been said several times, we are not talking about just a principle here; we are talking about an actual Bill. I know some people will criticise me and say, “Oh, you would oppose this, because of your religious views and all the rest of it.” Actually, I take quite a sensible and, I hope, pragmatic approach to this. I have listened to all these debates, and we have heard so many harrowing stories of people’s last hours. I think we should treat people on both sides of this argument with respect, understand their points of view, and respect the dignity of dying people.
I have always taken the view that we should open up this debate. Actually, I have brought forward a ten-minute rule Bill—which of course will be objected to at half-past 2 this afternoon—saying that we should have a full study, led by the Department of Health and Social Care, by health professionals, to work out how we can help people in their final hours. I have been to many hospices and care homes, and talked to many palliative care specialists who assure me that they have the resources and skills nowadays to make those final hours pain-free and bearable, but we have heard testimony from others saying that that is not possible. If they could convince me that there were some extreme cases where people were dying in agony, totally lacking in dignity in their final hours, then I would listen to those arguments, but I do not think that is the Bill that we have before us today.
I therefore urge Members to remember that we will be voting on a Bill, and I think that the Bill is so riddled through with difficulties and inconsistencies. I think it will be subject to human rights legislation. It is very difficult to argue that we can ask somebody to assist in a person’s death when they are within six months of dying of cancer—although there is no universal testimony or acceptance about how we work out those six months—but not if they are suffering from some appalling degenerative disease or are a quadriplegic or have no quality of life. So I think there is actually an argument that, if we pass this Bill today, we will move in the direction of Canada and we will have death on demand.
I will end on this point. Before voting for this Bill, just pause for a moment and think, “Wouldn’t it be better?” We have heard about the many hours on the abortion Bill, and the universality of clinical acceptance of it. Before we vote for this Bill, do we not think that we should ask the Health Department to have a profound and knowledgeable study, working with the royal colleges, on whether it is possible to have decent palliative care, not just in our wonderful hospices, but in all our hospitals? There is no doubt that in recent years, particularly since Shipman, there has been a fear among many NHS health  professionals about providing that degree of palliative care—that degree of morphine, fentanyl or these hugely effective modern drugs.
So, just pause and think. We are not voting on a principle; we can come back to this, and, at a later date, we can get consensus and we can have a really good Bill that will allow everybody to die in dignity.
I will speak briefly and cover just three points. I do not expect to persuade those committed to opposing the Bill to change their minds; I hope that I do not persuade those supporting it to change theirs. This is the time to put our concluded thoughts on the record before seeking their lordships’ opinions.
I start where I finished my speech on Second Reading: agency. Since that debate last November, I have continued to meet constituents on both sides of the argument, and answered hundreds of letters and emails—I am sure that other hon. Members have done the same. I have met mainly with groups that oppose the Bill, including faith groups, because they have sought to change my mind. I have not changed my mind. I am still driven by the plight of those suffering unnecessarily at the end of life.
I wholly respect the decision of those who would not want assisted dying for themselves, but I cannot accept their right to deny that choice to those who would, for the most profound reasons, use the provisions of the Bill to end their lives. The pain, suffering, indignity and degradation of a slow, painful, tortured death is something none of us would wish on a friend or relative—on anyone. If that suffering at the end of life, in the narrow circumstances prescribed by the Bill, can be avoided, who are we to deny that?
Will my hon. Friend give way?
I am not going to give way.
The obvious qualification to what should be a clear and personal choice to leave life in a matter and at a time of one’s choosing is the risk of coercion, and that has rightly dominated much of the debate for the past eight months. There are two points to be made here.
First, great effort has been expended, and is reflected in amendments to the Bill, to make the safeguards as comprehensive and watertight as possible, learning from and going beyond practice in other jurisdictions. Compliance with the provisions of the Bill is a rigorous process, but it is also a practical one; it is designed to be transparent and to test the intent of the person seeking an assisted death.
Secondly, some say that that is still not enough, but with what are they comparing it? The answer at best, and in some cases, is the status quo, which may involve an investigation post mortem as to whether assistance has been given—putting a caring loved one at risk of prosecution, but doing nothing to prevent those of malign intent.
Finally, although I have tried to see both sides on every issue, there is one point on which the opponents of the Bill are, in my opinion, just wrong: whether the Bill has, thus far, seen due process. I have been in  Parliament for a month over 20 years, and I can think of few Bills of this length and scope that have received so much scrutiny and so many hours in Committee, or on which so much evidence has been submitted and comment made.
Members will vote against the Bill for many reasons, even though by doing so they restrict the choice of others. They should compare the regime pre and post legislation and, I hope, decide that the Bill gives greater protection. But I ask them not to vote against it because we have lacked the time or information to make a decision—we have not—or because we do not as a country have the ability to resource the Bill—we do. A great trust and great opportunity have been given to the Members of this Parliament. This is the moment of decision, and we should discharge it to the best of our ability.
Thank you, Madam Deputy Speaker, for calling me to speak for the first time on this Bill; I did not vote on Second Reading in November.
In her opening speech this morning,  the hon. Member for Spen Valley (Kim Leadbeater)  said that we could choose to vote with our heads or with our hearts, and I have been grappling with that tension and conflict over the past few months. I am afraid that I cannot agree with the Chair of the Justice Committee,  the hon. Member for Hammersmith and Chiswick (Andy Slaughter) , that the Bill is stronger now than it was on Second Reading.
