today I want to recognize the Village of 
Franklin in Michigans 12th District as they celebrate their 
bicentennial anniversary.
  Established in 1824, the Village of Franklin is a very special place 
in our community. The village grew out of increased travel through the 
region after the completion of the Erie Canal, and its first residents 
were practical tradespeople skilled in smithing, carpentry, and 
masonry. To this day, Franklin residents embrace and preserve its 
beautiful, rural landscape, fondly calling it the ``Town That Time 
Forgot. Because of its numerous original 19th-century properties, 
Franklin was designated as Michigans first Historic District, and is 
listed on the National Register of Historic Places.
  Please join me and the 12th Congressional District in celebrating the 
Village of Franklins 200th birthday.
I rise to congratulate Judge Robert O. Bowen 
of the Marshall County Superior Court No. 1 as he prepares to retire 
from serving on the bench.
  A 1974 graduate of Indiana University, Judge Bowen obtained his Juris 
Doctor from Valparaiso University in 1977. In addition to his service 
on the bench, Robert also served as a Legislative Assistant in the 
Indiana General Assembly. Since his tenure on the Marshall County 
Superior Court No. 1 began on January 1, 1995, Judge Bowen has 
dedicated himself to advancing the principles of justice and ensuring 
that Hoosiers get a fair shake before the law.
  The Rule of Law tradition we have inherited helps secure individual 
liberty and promotes the conditions necessary for human flourishing. It 
is incumbent on us to do our part to make sure these principles of 
justice and Rule of Law precepts are passed seamlessly from one 
generation to the next. That mission is one Judge Bowen has embraced 
wholeheartedly and worked tirelessly to advance.
  While serving on the Court, Judge Bowen has also demonstrated his 
steadfast commitment to the local community, most especially in his 
church membership where he taught adult education over the years. 
Additionally, the Sagamore of the Wabash Award he has been honored with 
is another testament to Judge Bowens leadership abilities and his 
civic-oriented nature.
  As Judge Bowens career comes to a close, I have no doubt that the 
Marshall County community is better off because of his service. I know 
that Roberts wife Patty and their three children--Andrew, Chris, and 
Betsy--are all very proud of him, and I am too. I join Hoosiers 
throughout Indianas Second Congressional District in expressing our 
gratitude to Judge Robert O. Bowen for his service and in wishing him a 
very happy retirement and all the best going forward.
I rise today to honor a dedicated 
husband, loving father, exceptional community leader, faithful servant 
of God, and friend of longstanding, Bishop Reginald Thomas Jackson. 
Bishop Jackson was honored for his 8 years of dedicated service in 
Georgia as the Presiding Prelate of the Sixth Episcopal District of the 
African Methodist Episcopal Church. This event was held at the Saint 
Phillip AME Church in Decatur, Georgia on July 12, 2024, at 6:00 p.m.
  The genesis of the life of Bishop Reginald Jackson began with his 
birth on April 26, 1954, in Dover, Delaware. He is a product of Dover 
Public Schools and in 1976 graduated from Delaware State University 
with a Bachelors Degree in History. In 1972, he was called to preach 
the Gospel and licensed under the pastorate of the Rev. Rudolph W. 
Coleman; was ordained as an Itinerant Deacon in 1975 under the 
leadership of Bishop Earnest Lawrence Hickman and appointed Supply 
Pastor at Graham AME Church. Always working to improve his preaching 
skills and knowledge of the Gospel, Bishop Jackson graduated from the 
Turner Seminary at the Interdenominational Theological Center in 1979, 
was ordained as an Itinerant Elder by Bishop Richard Allen Hildebrand 
in 1977 and appointed Supply Pastor at St. John AME Church in Atlanta, 
Georgia in 1978.
  Bishop Jackson spent 33 years serving in the state of New Jersey, 2 
years as Pastor of

St. John AME Church and 31 years at St. Matthew AME Church. During his 
long tenure at St. Matthew, he increased the congregation from 75 to 
over 2,800 members; he instituted more than 30 ministries to meet the 
spiritual, emotional, educational and physical needs of the church and 
community; and he increased the church annual budget from $50,000 to $2 
million. George Washington Carver once said ``How far you go in life 
depends on your being tender with the young, compassionate with the 
aged, sympathetic with the striving and tolerant of the weak and the 
strong. Because someday in your life you will have been all of these. 
Bishop Jackson has used his lifes work to advocate for the most 
vulnerable among us to include minorities, the young, the elderly, and 
the disenfranchised. He has been a voice for the voiceless and he has 
given hope to the hopeless.
  Bishop Jackson served as Executive Director of the Black Ministers 
Council of New Jersey, representing over 600 New Jersey Churches; 
served on the Orange Public School System Board of Education as 
President for 12 years; and sits on the Board of Trustees of Essex 
County College, serving as President for 10 years. He was named Man of 
the Year by New Jersey Monthly Magazine, received the William Ashby 
Award from the United Way, the Martin Luther King, Jr. Award from the 
Newark North Ward Center, and Honorary Doctorates from Wilberforce 
University and Payne Theological Seminary. He is a member of Phi Beta 
Sigma Fraternity and a Life Member of the NAACP.
  In 2012, Reginald Thomas Jackson was elected and consecrated the 
132nd Bishop of the AME Church at the 49th Quadrennial Session of the 
General Conference, held in Nashville, Tennessee and was appointed to 
the 20th Episcopal District (Malawi Zimbabwe, Tanzania and Uganda) as 
the Ecumenical and Urban Affairs Officer. He has served as Chairman of 
the Social Action Commission of the AME Church and is the current 
Chairman of the Commission on Colleges, Universities and Seminaries.
  Eight years ago, Bishop Jackson accepted his charge in Georgia as 
Presiding Prelate of the Sixth Episcopal District of the AME Church. 
Continuing his longstanding advocacy for social justice, he has been a 
staunch champion for voter registration, education and turnout. He has 
ferociously lobbied the Georgia General Assembly for hate crime 
legislation and gun reform. Following an arrest for a planned attack on 
an AME Church in Gainesville, Georgia and the murder of Ahamd Arbery in 
February 2020, Bishop Jackson led the charge for a bill which was 
signed into law by Governor Brain Kemp in June 2020. In 2020, Bishop 
Jackson also collaborated with the leaders of every Georgia State 
African American religious denomination in conducting massive voter 
registration and education efforts throughout Georgia, resulting in the 
election of President Joe Biden, Vice President Kamala Harris, U.S. 
Senators Raphael Warnock and Jon Ossoff, shifting the balance of power 
in the Senate. Because of this seismic shift, historic legislation to 
improve lives and communities was signed into law, including the 
Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, the Inflation Reduction Act, Historic 
Funding for HBCUs, as well as the appointment of an African American 
woman to the U.S. Supreme Court. In 2022 and now in 2024, he is leading 
an historic partnership with the Christian Methodist Episcopal Church 
to energize and mobilize minority voters for the 2024 elections.
  Now, after 8 years in Georgia, Bishop Jackson will be leaving for 
assignment to another Episcopal District where he will no doubt share 
his vision and wisdom in service to Gods people. While his departure 
will be a great loss to Georgia, I am certain that his impactful 
leadership will be a catalytic gain to those in his new region of 
responsibility.
  Bishop Jackson has accomplished much in his life, but none of it 
would have been possible without the grace of God and the love and 
support of his wife, Attorney Christy Jackson, who has served along 
side him as Supervisor of the Sixth Episcopal District, and their 
children Regina and Seth. Georgia, our Nation and the world, are better 
because of Bishop Jacksons ministry and service. To God Be the Glory.
, I ask my colleagues in the U.S. House of Representatives 
to join my wife, Vivian, and me, along with the more than 765,000 
people of Georgias 2nd Congressional District, in extending our 
sincerest appreciation and best wishes to Bishop Reginald Thomas 
Jackson upon his departure from Georgia as the Presiding Prelate of the 
Sixth Episcopal District of the AME Church. May God continue to bless 
his ministry and service on behalf of our Lord and Savior, Jesus 
Christ.
I rise today to recognize the life of 
James ``Jim Hatch.
  Jim was dedicated to serving our community and was always kind and 
helpful. Included in his long career, he assisted with former 
Congressman George Millers campaign and the Youth Fund. Additionally, 
Jim was incredibly hardworking and was a skilled handyman. He also 
enjoyed traveling the world and was a proud dog parent to Minnie the 
Pooch. Jim will be remembered for his optimism, positivity, and the 
impact hes had on countless lives.
  Jim is survived by Carol, his loving wife of 60 years, and his 
children Suzanne (Rob) and Jill (Steve), grandchildren Sophie (Joshua), 
Sarah (Rick), Matthew, Lauren, Kristi (Ben) and Sarah (Jason Henry), 
great grandchildren Olivia and Cameron, his sister Sandra, brother 
Robert, and bonus daughter and grandsons Tomoko, Hiro, and Akira 
Tamura.
  Please join me in honoring my friend Jim Hatch. He will be remembered 
for his outstanding character and his commitment to his community.
today, I introduce the Major General David 
F. Wherley, Jr., District of Columbia National Guard Retention and 
College Access Program Act. This bill would permanently authorize 
funding for the Major General David F Wherley, Jr., District of 
Columbia National Guard Retention and College Access Program, which 
provides financial assistance for higher education to members of the 
D.C. National Guard, which is an exclusively federal entity.
  This program and bill are named for Major General David F. Wherley, 
Jr., former Commanding General of the D.C. National Guard, who, along 
with his wife, Ann, and seven others were tragically killed when Metro 
trains collided on the Red Line on June 22, 2009. I named this bill for 
Major General Wherley because he worked tirelessly with me for many 
years to get funding for this program, and because of his devotion to 
D.C. youth and to the D.C. National Guard.
  This program was recommended by Major General Wherley and his 
successor at the D.C. National Guard, Major General Errol Schwartz, to 
stem the troublesome loss of D.C. National Guard members to other 
units, including National Guards in surrounding states that offer 
financial assistance for higher education to their members. I am 
grateful that Congress has consistently provided funding for this 
program, most recently $600,000 in fiscal year 2024. Permanently 
authorizing this program will help ensure that members of the D.C. 
National Guard receive the same benefits as members of other National 
Guards and help the D.C. National Guard recruit and retain members.
  This program not only benefits D.C. National Guard members, the great 
majority of whom live in Maryland or Virginia, but also helps the D.C. 
National Guard to maintain the force necessary to protect the federal 
presence in D C.
  I urge my colleagues to support this bill.
I include in the Record the following 
newsletter to give an update to my constituents on issues surrounding 
our NATO partners and election integrity.

       Dear Friend: As a member of the House Appropriations State, 
     Foreign Operations, and Related Programs Subcommittee, I 
     recently traveled with a small delegation to the Baltic 
     States of Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, then Poland. There we 
     met with those nations top military and political leaders 
     and diplomats. Throughout this trip I was constantly reminded 
     of the evil that has reigned our earth for centuries.
       In the U.S. we are somewhat isolated geographically. In 
     this volatile region they live under the constant reminder of 
     their struggles for freedom and despicable acts of centuries 
     of occupation, depopulation, repopulation, and genocide. 
     Daily, these critical NATO allies are exposed to Putins 
     verbal threats as well as living in the fear of regular cyber 
     and terrorist attacks.
       More importantly, those in the Baltics are watching the 
     reality of Russian aggression, cruelty, and massacres play 
     out in their own backyard today. They saw the barbaric act of 
     Putin bombing a childrens hospital. They saw that over 
     20,000 Ukrainian children have been kidnapped and moved to 
     Russia as part of their historys reputation for depopulating 
     those they dominate.
       The leaders in this region talked with me because of their 
     close proximity to Russia and Belarus about their constant 
     fear that they could be annihilated within seconds, and might 
     never see it coming. They know that Putin is ruthless enough 
     and has the thirst for power and land to do it.
       We dont see these pressures from our secure vantage point 
     in the U.S., outside of our new threats created by Joe 
     Bidens lackadaisical policies over our own border. However, 
     these European partners feel a daily struggle to cling to 
     their democracy and freedom.
       Each of these vulnerable countries are doing their part. 
     Each of them contributes well over 2 percent of their GDP 
     toward their own defense, knowing theyll likely have to face 
     another Russian invasion of their homeland some day. 
     Additionally, they are contributing to the military and 
     humanitarian needs in Ukraine.
       But one thing became very clear to me on this trip. None of 
     them have the size, the economy, nor the military capability 
     to preserve freedom and democracy on their own. Their 
     existence is dependent on all of our NATO partners.

      Only U.S. citizens should have influence on U.S. elections.

       The Safeguard American Voter Eligibility (SAVE) Act that I 
     co-sponsored and helped the House pass protects and preserves 
     the right of American citizens to vote. This legislation 
     would require states to obtain proof of citizenship in person 
     when registering an individual to vote in federal elections 
     and requires states to remove non-citizens from existing 
     voter rolls.
       Foreign election interference is made possible because of 
     our lax voter registration laws that allow noncitizens to 
     register and vote in federal elections. With the ongoing 
     crisis at our southern border, this piece of legislation is 
     essential to safeguard the integrity of American elections.
       The SAVE Act will close the loopholes that allow noncitizen 
     registration, and thereby voting, to improve election 
     security, minimize the risk of foreign interference and 
     restore Americans confidence in U.S. elections.

       Reminder: Join my next in-person town hall in Yancey County 
     on Tuesday, July 16. The town hall will take place from 6:00-
     7:30 p.m. at the Yancey County Courthouse, 110 Town Sq., 
     Burnsville, NC.
       Im looking forward to sharing an update about the latest 
     legislative opportunities and challenges in Congress and 
     answering questions about the issues that matter to you.

       Congratulations, Jessie Frank, for winning our DC offices 
     first ever Green Thumb Award.
       These DC Longworth building offices are drab. To add a 
     little life, spirit, and ambiance to our office, for the past 
     90 days our team was challenged to keep the area around their 
     workspace green and vibrant. I appreciate my entire teams 
     enthusiasm and light-hearted competition to make our office 
     green and alive. Jessie received the award, but we all 
     benefited with a more pleasant place to work.
           With my warmest regards,
                                                    Chuck Edwards,
     Member of Congress.
-BALART. Mr. Speaker, I was unable to vote on July 8th and 
9th as I had an immovable commitment. Had I been present, I would have 
voted: YEA on H.R. 5441--Roll Call No. 337; YEA on H.R. 897--Roll Call 
No. 336; YEA on H.R. 7700--Roll Call No. 343; and YEA on H.R. 7637--
Roll Call No. 341.
I rise to recognize and celebrate the 
19th anniversary of the opening of the Prince William County, Virginia 
branch of Victory Christian Ministries International. This milestone 
represents nearly two decades of dedicated service, spiritual guidance, 
and community support to the Prince William community.
  With humble beginnings in Clinton, Maryland, Pastors Tony and Cynthia 
Brazelton have dedicated themselves to growing and nurturing the 
Victory Christian Ministries International community. VCMIs story 
began in the Brazeltons Maryland basement where they hosted simple, 
yet powerful prayer meetings that rapidly grew. Soon, people from 
different

parts of the Washington, D.C. metro area began to join. To accommodate 
their growth, they incorporated Victory Christian Ministries 
International of Woodbridge, Virginia in July 2005. Over the years, 
VCMI has grown from a single church to an international ministry with 
several locations across our nation and in Europe. This growth is a 
testament to the positive influence and transformative power of their 
message.
  Since its establishment, the Woodbridge branch of VCMI has been a 
beacon of hope and a source of strength for many in the community. 
Through their dynamic Sunday services and engaging weekly activities, 
they have offered spiritual nourishment and guidance to countless 
individuals and families. VCMIs commitment to youth development is 
particularly noteworthy. Their Chrisma Teens program has provided a 
safe and nurturing environment for our young people from all walks of 
life to explore their faith, develop leadership skills, and give back 
to their community.
  As we commemorate this 19th anniversary, we celebrate not just the 
longevity of an institution, but the countless lives that have been 
touched, the families that have been strengthened, and the communities 
that have been enriched by their work.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in congratulating Victory 
Christian Ministries Internationals Woodbridge branch on their 19th 
anniversary. I applaud Pastors Tony and Cynthia Brazelton as well as 
the entire VCMI community for their contributions to Prince William 
County--guided by the values of love, compassion, and community 
service.
I rise today to honor and 
congratulate the Grassfield High School Softball team on winning the 
Class 6 Region A Championship.
  As their Congresswoman, I am proud of these young athletes and their 
recent achievement.
  Located in Chesapeake, Virginia, the Grassfield High School Grizzlies 
were able to bring the Class 6 Region A Championship back home to their 
fellow students, faculty, families, and friends through their hard work 
and dedication to their team. They are a group of strong women who had 
a near-perfect record going into their state championship game. They 
have not won the regional championship game since 2018 and assistant 
coach, Larry Murphy, led these women to a four to one victory.
  As a former athlete myself, I want each of these young women to know 
Virginias 2nd District is extremely proud of their accomplishment and 
applauds them on their well-earned victory. Again, congratulations to 
the Grassfield High School Softball team on winning the Class 6 Region 
A Championship.
I rise today to honor and 
congratulate the Great Bridge High School Boys Soccer team on winning 
the Class 5 Region A Championship.
  As their Congresswoman, I am proud of these young athletes and their 
recent achievement.
  Located in Chesapeake, Virginia, the Great Bridge High School 
Wildcats were able to bring the Class 5 Region A Championship back home 
to their fellow students, faculty, families, and friends through their 
hard work and dedication to their team. The Great Bridge Boys Soccer 
team is undefeated this season, and goalie, Griffin Thomas, recorded a 
shutout in the net, and Carson Danner scored the game winning goal to 
secure their championship.
  As a former athlete myself, I want each of these young men to know 
Virginias 2nd District is extremely proud of their accomplishment and 
applauds them on their well-earned victory. Again, congratulations to 
the Great Bridge High School Boys Soccer team on winning the Class 5 
Region A Championship.
I rise today to honor and 
congratulate the Greenbrier Christian Baseball team on winning the 2024 
VISAA DII State Championship.
  As their Congresswoman, I am proud of these young athletes and their 
recent achievement.
  Located in Chesapeake, Virginia, the Greenbrier Christian Gators were 
able to bring the VISAA DII State Championship back home to their 
fellow students, faculty, families, and friends by their hard work and 
dedication to their team. The Greenbrier Christian Baseball Team has 
fifteen State Championship titles under their belt. In the beginning of 
the year this team was unranked and quickly became unstoppable 
averaging 8.9 runs per game. This reflects not only their athletic 
capabilities, but also their steadfast determination to excel.
  As a former athlete myself, I want each of these young men to know 
Virginias 2nd District is extremely proud of their accomplishment and 
applauds them on their well-earned victory. Again, congratulations to 
the Greenbrier Christian Baseball Team on winning the 2024 VISAA DII 
State Championship.
I rise today to honor and 
congratulate the

Nansemond-Suffolk Softball team on winning the 2024 VISAA DII State 
Championship.
  As their Congresswoman, I am proud of these young athletes and their 
recent achievement.
  Located in Suffolk, Virginia, the Nansemond-Suffolk Saints were able 
to bring the VISAA DII State Championship back home to their fellow 
students, faculty, families, and friends through their hard work and 
dedication to their team. The Nansemond-Suffolk Softball Team is 
celebrating their fifth straight state championship title with their 
head coach, Brittany Thornburg, leading her team to victory.
  As a former athlete myself, I want each of these young women to know 
Virginias 2nd District is extremely proud of their accomplishment and 
applauds them on their well-earned victory. Again, congratulations to 
the Nansemond-Suffolk Softball Team on winning the 2024 VISAA DII State 
Championship.