I rise to wish a happy 100th birthday to Mr. 
Victor Monacelli of Ridgecrest, California, a veteran of the Second 
World War and a soon-to-be great-great-grandfather.
  Born in Humphrey, Washington, to Tom Monacelli and Myrtle Winsor 
Monacelli on November 16, 1924, Victor was raised with his brothers 
Cecil, Leroy, and Thomas Monacelli. At age seventeen, Victor was one of 
the many brave young men who, along with his brother, Thomas, 
volunteered for service in World War II just after his graduation from 
Ellensburg High School. With his enlistment in the U.S. Navy on October 
27, 1942, Victor would soon find himself stationed in the South 
Pacifics New Hebrides Islands where he supported the Guadalcanal 
Campaign for 19 months. During his time stationed in what he recalls as 
a ``tropical paradise, enemy aircraft launched waves of attacks 
against Victors position. Auguring well for his posterity, he was 
never once injured in these airstrikes. After roughly two years serving 
our country through some of its greatest naval operations, Victor would 
finally return to the United States. On his birthday in 1944, he 
managed to cross the International Date Line while being transported 
stateside to San Francisco, granting Victor and his friends one 
additional day to celebrate his twentieth birthday.
  Following a brief posting in Jacksonville, Florida, in 1947, Victor 
was transferred to the Naval facility in Lakehurst, New Jersey, where 
he attended flight school and completed his first parachute jump on 
August 2, 1947. Through this training, he became certified as a 
Parachute Rigger, safely packing and repacking parachutes for airborne 
personnel. It was near the facility there in Lakehurst, New Jersey that 
Victor met his first wife Jeanne. In 1949, he was transferred to Naval 
Auxiliary Air Station Charlestown in South Carolina, where for six 
months, he was stationed on the nations longest-serving aircraft 
carrier in American history--the U.S.S. Midway.
  Returning to the Pacific once again with the U.S. Navy, Victor served 
in Hawaii from 1950 to 1958, serving in the Korean War through the 
training and instruction of airborne personnel in the use of aviation 
survival equipment. Witnesses described him as instrumental in 
establishing the survival school at Naval Air Station Barbers Point 
where he continued to safely pack and inspect parachutes and survival 
equipment as well as airborne personnel. His final assignment in the 
U.S. Navy saw him move to New Iberia, Louisiana, where he met his 
second wife Mary, and retired from active duty by joining the Fleet 
Reserve in 1961. Victor retired from the Navy on November 1, 1971, 
achieving the rank of E7 Petty Officer after nearly 30 years of service 
to the United States.
  Victor moved to La Verne, California in 1974, where he owned a gas 
station and later worked as a travel agent. He soon fell in love with 
Californias beauty, next moving to Bakersfield, Lake Isabella, and 
finally to Ridgecrest. These days, Victor enjoys spending quiet time at 
home with his wife Juliette and spending time with his two sons, David 
and Victor Jay, daughter Lorri, six grandchildren, nine great-
grandchildren, and soon his first great-great-grandchild. In 2022, 
Victor was one of two living World War II veterans in Ridgecrest who 
were both honored and presented with certificates of appreciation for 
their service to the country.
, from our nations Capitol, and on behalf of a most 
grateful Nation, I ask my colleagues to join me in celebrating 100 
years of Victor Monacellis incredible life. His patriotism and pursuit 
of the American dream should inspire future generations and this 
dedication to defending our warrior is another symbol of this legacy.
I rise today with great honor and excitement 
on behalf of the Westside Church of God Consecration Planning Teams 
announcement of Dr. Paul L. Binion II. Today, we will witness the 
Episcopal Consecration of Dr. Paul L. Binion to the esteemed office of 
Bishop.
  Elevating an individual to the position of Bishop is a recognition of 
their exceptional leadership, unwavering service, and unblemished 
integrity. Dr. Paul L. Binion, fondly known as Pastor Binion, has 
dedicated over four decades of his life to serving both his local 
community and the state of California. He is not only a spiritual 
leader but a mentor, confidant, and guiding light to countless 
individuals.
  Pastor Binions remarkable journey began in Fairfield, Alabama, where 
he was born to Paul Lawrence Binion, Sr. and Sara Ellafair House 
Binion. As the eldest of five siblings, he embarked on a path that 
would lead him to Los Angeles, California, and eventually to Fresno, 
where he assumed the role of Senior Pastor at the Westside Church of 
God in 1977. His educational achievements include a Bachelors Degree 
in History from California State University, Los Angeles, and a 
Masters Degree of Divinity from Fuller Theological Seminary in 
Pasadena, California. His profound commitment to faith and education 
was acknowledged when the Southern California School of Ministry 
conferred upon him the honorary title of ``Doctor of Divinity.
  Pastor Binions impact extends far beyond the walls of his church. He 
has been an active leader in various organizations and initiatives, 
demonstrating his dedication to the betterment of the community. Some 
of his notable roles include serving as a Presbyter of Berean 
Fellowship of Churches, participating in the African American Clergy 
Task Force, contributing to the Southwest Fresno Development 
Corporation, and advising the President of Fresno Pacific University on 
Clergy and Church Development. He has also been an advocate for social 
justice through his involvement with Central California Evangelicals 
for Social Action in addition to his contributions to the City of 
Fresno Mayoral Advisory Board and the Police Advisory Council. Pastor 
Binions deep commitment to mental health and well-being is exemplified 
through the establishment of the Westside Community Counseling Center, 
which has served as a vital resource for the community.
  His dedication to education and career development has shone through 
the Education and Career Initiative, a program designed to empower 
students in the pursuit of their educational and professional 
aspirations. Throughout his journey, Pastor Binion has been a source of 
guidance and wisdom, not only for his congregation but also for fellow 
pastors and community leaders. He has shared his knowledge and faith as 
a conference speaker, preacher, and teacher of the Bible, leaving a 
lasting impact on both local and national levels. In addition to his 
remarkable professional achievements, Pastor Binion is a devoted 
husband to Valarie Jean Metoyer Binion, and a loving father and 
grandfather. He and Valarie have been married since 1978 and have three 
daughters, Tiffany, Crisandra, and Kimberley, along with several 
grandchildren.
  As we come together to witness the Episcopal Consecration of Dr. Paul 
L. Binion, we recognize not only a spiritual leader but a dedicated 
servant of the community. His journey is a testament to the enduring 
impact that one individual can have when guided by faith, compassion, 
and a commitment to the betterment of others.
, I invite my esteemed colleagues to join me in 
commemorating this significant moment in the life of Dr. Paul L. 
Binion, a man whose contributions have touched the hearts and souls of 
many.
I rise today to commemorate the life of Irene 
DeVan Peloian, a remarkable individual whose journey from Belleville, 
New Jersey, to Fresno, California, was filled with love, family, and a 
deep commitment to serving others. Irene, born on June 27, 1927, in 
Belleville, New Jersey, was an astonishing individual whose life 
touched many hearts. Her legacy, marked by grace, resilience, and 
unwavering devotion to her loved ones, will forever be cherished.
  Irenes early years were shaped by her parents, George and Armen 
DeVan. Her father, an Armenian-Turkish immigrant, and her mother, a 
survivor of the Armenian genocide, instilled in her a strong sense of 
heritage and determination. She carried this with her throughout her 
lifes adventures. Completing her high school education in 1945, 
Irenes fondest memories included attending dances featuring Frank 
Sinatra. These dances, enjoyed with her best friend and cousin, Alyce, 
added a touch of magic to her youth.
  Driven by dreams of a career in film, Irene pursued her passion by 
enrolling at the New York American Academy of Dramatic Arts in 
Manhattan. Her aspirations led her on a unique path. After two years, 
she relocated with her family to Fresno, California, where she embarked 
on a career in retail, notably working at Cahns Womens Clothing store 
on Fulton Street. Additionally, Irene ventured into the world of runway 
modeling. In 1952, Irene married Simon (Sam) Marootian, and together 
they raised their family on a vineyard ranch in Fowler, California. 
Irenes warmth and culinary talents made her a beloved hostess, and the 
couple enjoyed their evenings playing card games with close friends. 
The close-knit community of Fowler held a special place in her heart, 
and she often reflected on those years as the best of her life. Irene 
had a desire to travel, with Hawaii and Las Vegas being among her 
favorite destinations; she had quite an impressive reputation as a 
blackjack player.
  Passionate about politics, Irene dedicated 30 years of her life to 
various Democratic Party campaigns. She organized numerous political 
events at her home, where she would cook Armenian delicacies for 
visiting governors and senators, showcasing her remarkable hospitality. 
Beyond her political involvement, her heart belonged to the San 
Francisco Giants, and she had a deep love for rescue dogs and stray 
cats. Irene held a special affinity for children and young people, 
often adopting ``sons, ``daughters, and ``grandchildren into her 
extended family. Above all, Irene was a devoted wife, mother, daughter, 
sister, cousin, ``aunty, and friend. Following the loss of her first 
husband, Sam, Irene found love and companionship with Edward Peloian, 
whom she married in 1988. Their enduring love and partnership lasted 
almost 30 years until Eds passing in 2016. They shared a passion for 
the arts, providing support to the Fresno Philharmonic and Fresno Art 
Museum.
  Irene DeVan Peloians legacy lives on, leaving behind cherished 
memories in the hearts of her loved ones. She is survived by her son 
and daughter-in-law, Marcus and Anchalee Marootian; daughter, Robyn 
Marootian; sister-in-law, Scotty DeVan, of Washington; nieces Jaymie 
DeVan of Los Angeles and Jordan DeVan of Washington; and three nephews, 
Mike Shahbazian, Steven Shahbazian, and Robert Shahbazian. She is also 
survived by her godson, Dr. Jordan Howard, of Atlanta, and her best 
friend, Diane Mosesian, of Colorado.
, I extend an invitation to my esteemed colleagues to join 
me in honoring the life and legacy of Irene. Her remarkable time, 
filled with resilience, love, and devotion, leaves an indelible mark on 
our hearts and in the tapestry of our community. Irenes enduring 
spirit will forever hold a cherished place in our memories and the 
lives she touched.
I rise today to honor the life of Patricia 
Ann ``Patty Simonian, who passed away at age 80 on March 11, 2023. 
Patty was mother, friend, and member of the St. George Greek Orthodox 
Church. Patty was a godmother to me. She was known for the many 
contributions she made in the community throughout her life.
  Patty was born on May 4, 1942, to John and Mary Costa in Merced, 
California. She went to Central Union High School and met the love of 
her life, Pete Simonian. Ten years later, they married on August 26, 
1961. they started a farm of vegetables. their children Talbert, 
Nanette, and Peter J. would help on the farm planting prunes that they 
grew organically until 2011 when Patty decided to sell the farm to 
family members.
  During her life, Patty was very involved in the community and with 
her family. She was a FFA Mom, CUHS Band Mom, president of the POMS for 
2 years, 4H leader in different capacities, Fresno County President for 
7 years, and more. She was an active member for her church, St. George 
Greek Orthodox Church. Patty and Pete decided to renew their vows on 
their 40th Anniversary at the church.
  Patty enjoyed being with her husband, and they both participated in 
the Cabrillo Civic Clubs of California. Patty would participate in 
different groups for her children. She joined the Blue Star Moms 
because of her son, Peters service in the United States Navy, and 
would support her daughter Nanette with the Central Valley CWA.
  Her love for family was evident. Patty enjoyed being around her 
grandchildren and never denied babysitting them. The time she spent 
with family and friends was something to cherish every chance she had.
  During her time at Paintbrush Assisted Living and Memory Care, her 
joy radiated as the greeter, and she spent her time in the community 
garden. Patty was precise on the crops she planted and would make sure 
to inform the residents it was time to pick them.
  Patty was preceded in death by her parents, John and Mary Costa, and 
her husband, Pete Simonian.
  Patty is survived by her son Talbert, her daughter Nanette, her son 
Peter J. and wife Toni, grandchildren: Matthew, Kylie, Jerad, Kassidy, 
and Caydin. She is survived by her brother Kenneth Costa and brother-
in-law Scott, sister Johnell Costa Wilt, and brother-in-law Dennis. 
Patty is also survived by neighboring cousins Bette OSullivan and Jim 
Costa, along with her nieces, nephews, and many cousins.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in honoring the life of 
Patricia Ann ``Patty Simonian. May she be remembered as the pure joy 
of her life for all who knew her.
it is my privilege to honor and celebrate 
, Maryland as he 
approaches his 100th birthday on November 21st.
  Born in 1924, Mr. Wainwright honorably served in the United States 
Army during World War II from 1943 until 1946.
  It is a distinct privilege to recognize Mr. Wainwright on his 
upcoming 100th birthday and celebrate this wonderful milestone. On 
behalf of Marylands First Congressional District, I wish Mr. 
Wainwright a very happy birthday.
I rise today to recognize 
Aarohi Rastogi, Mia Enders, and Rayna Reed, three Girl Scouts from Girl 
Scouts of NYPENN Pathways, for demonstrating extraordinary leadership 
at the 11th Annual Girls Speak Out in commemoration of International 
Day of the Girl on October 11, 2024, at the United Nations (UN) 
Headquarters in New York, NY.
  International Day of the Girl is an annual and internationally 
recognized observance on October 11 which acknowledges the importance, 
power, and potential of adolescent girls. This years theme, `Girls 
vision for the future, conveys the need for urgent action and 
persistent hope, driven by the power of girls voices and vision for 
the future. With the right support, resources and opportunities, the 
potential of the worlds more than 1.1 billion girls is limitless. And 
when girls lead, the impact is immediate and wide reaching: families 
and communities are all stronger, our future brighter.
  Co-hosted by the Permanent Missions of Canada, Peru, and Turkey, UN 
Women, UNICEF, and UNFPA, the 11th Annual Girls Speak Out for 
International Day of the Girl Child called for a push for 
accountability for girls rights and investment in girls leadership 
and vision for their futures. This years Girls Speak Out at UNHQ 
provided an opportunity for girls to hold direct dialogue with Member 
States and UN Agencies through a girl-led town hall discussion, 
followed by a Girls Action conference, hosted by girls, for girls.
  Aarohi, Mia, and Rayna were selected to not only participate as Girl 
Activists but also as moderators for the town hall to engage with 
policymakers and emphasize the importance of girls in bringing change 
to their peers and communities, and facilitators for the Girls Action 
conference learning labs.
  In their roles as Girl Activists, Aarohi and Rayna shared the work 
they have done in pursuit of the prestigious Gold Award, the highest 
award in Girl Scouting.
  For Aarohi, the Gold Award is an opportunity to create and deliver a 
comprehensive mental health education program for 7th-12th grade 
students in India. Inspired by her family members and peers in India, 
Aarohi collaborated with NGOs and mental health experts from around the 
world to create a curriculum covering topics such as stigma, stress and 
anxiety, depression, and suicide prevention.
  For Rayna, the Gold Award is an opportunity to establish a peer 
mentoring program with three of her friends, including Mia, and her 
schools Assistant Principal to mitigate learning loss and the effects 
of the COVID-19 Pandemic. With the launch of the Middle School Mentor 
Program, Rayna and her peers seek to build community and increase 
access to free tutoring and mentorship programs at their school.
, on behalf of the people of New Yorks 22nd Congressional 
District, I thank these three outstanding young women for their 
leadership and wish them the best of luck in their future endeavors.
RECOGNIZING OHIO NATIONAL GUARD COMPANY B, 3rd BATTALION, 238th 
AVIATION REGIMENT BEING NAMED OHIOS 13th DISTRICT CHAMPION OF THE WEEK
today, I rise to recognize Ohio National 
Guard Company B, 3rd Battalion, 238th Aviation Regiment from Green as 
Ohios 13th Congressional District Champion of the Week.
  Hurricane Helene caused serious flooding and damage across Florida, 
Georgia, the Carolinas, Tennessee and Virginia, which left roads 
underwater, basements flooded, wires down, people trapped in their cars 
in flooded areas, and people stranded in their homes.
  Ohio National Guard Company B, 3rd Battalion, 238th Aviation Regiment 
answered the call to assist. These brave men and women navigated 
through flooded North Carolina streets to assist people stranded in 
their homes and cars.
  Ohios 13th Congressional District is made up of champions who work 
hard and dont hesitate to lend a helping hand to a neighbor in need. 
The unwavering and selfless work of these service members in the wake 
of Hurricane Helene is a shining example of why our district is known 
as the ``Birthplace of Champions.
  I thank the members of the Ohio National Guard Company B, 3rd 
Battalion, 238th Aviation Regiment for their collaboration, bravery, 
and service in the aftermath of this hurricane, and for dedicating 
their lives each and every day to protect our community and country.
I rise today to recognize an 
extraordinary individual from Pennsylvanias First Congressional 
District--someone who has gone above and beyond the call of duty in 
service to both our community and our country. It is with great respect 
and admiration that I recognize Bill Ridler as one of our districts 
distinguished Hometown Heroes.
  Hometown Heroes are not defined by titles or accolades but by the 
quiet power of their actions. They are distinguished by their 
unwavering integrity, the strength of their character, and their 
steadfast commitment to the

people and places they serve. They are the foundation upon which our 
communities stand--the ones who lift others up, inspire hope, and in 
doing so, call us all to higher standards of service and compassion. 
Bill has embodied this spirit in ways that words can scarcely capture.
  Bills journey has been one full of challenges: Bill has tuberous 
sclerosis, a disease that causes tumors to form all over the body, 
reduced his one working kidney to functioning at 15 percent, causes 
seizures due to the tumors on his brain, high blood pressure from the 
ones growing in his kidneys, and on top of that chemotherapy treatment 
has caused him to be immunosuppressed. Yet, despite these hardships, 
Bill is the embodiment of joy, compassion, optimism, and resilience. 
Since the age of six, Bill has competed in the Special Olympics and 
worked tirelessly to raise awareness about the impact of the games 
while serving as a beacon of inspiration for those facing similar 
challenges. Remarkably Bill gives away his hard-earned medals to other 
athletes, advocates, and community members to inspire them, motivate 
them, and bring joy to them when they need it most. Bills efforts 
earned him the prestigious Sheetz Family Award of Excellence for his 
resilience and dedication--an honor bestowed upon the Special Olympics 
athlete whose determination and efforts demonstrate the power of the 
human spirit to overcome obstacles and inspire greatness.
  Bill is a testament to the impact of positivity and a reminder that 
even in the face of immense challenges, we have the power to rise, 
inspire, and make a difference. Today, we honor Bill Ridler not just 
for his remarkable deeds but for who he is--a true hero in every sense 
of the word.
  On behalf of Pennsylvanias First Congressional District, I extend my 
deepest gratitude to Bill Ridler for his extraordinary service. I ask 
my colleagues to join me in honoring this exceptional individual, whose 
leadership and spirit of service will inspire generations to come. May 
his example remind us of the boundless potential within each of us to 
make our communities, country, and world a better place.
I rise today to recognize an 
extraordinary individual from Pennsylvanias First Congressional 
District--someone who has gone above and beyond the call of duty in 
service to both our community and our country. It is with great respect 
and admiration that I recognize Elizabeth Todderud, one of our 
districts distinguished Hometown Heroes.
  Hometown Heroes are not defined by titles or accolades but by the 
quiet power of their actions. They are distinguished by their 
unwavering integrity, the strength of their character, and their 
steadfast commitment to the

people and places they serve. They are the foundation upon which our 
communities stand--the ones who lift others up, inspire hope, and, in 
doing so, call us all to higher standards of service and compassion. 
Elizabeth has embodied this spirit in ways that words can scarcely 
capture.
  Over the past two decades, Elizabeth has poured her heart and soul 
into handcrafting over 300 blankets for the Navy-Marine Corps Relief 
Society Budget for Baby Program and Camp Lejeune. Rita Fountain, the 
Relief Society Director, emphasized the profound impact of Elizabeths 
contributions to the Navy and marine Corps families at Camp Lejeune 
preparing to welcome new babies, often many miles away from their loved 
ones. Elizabeths blankets provide these families warmth, comfort, and 
a sense of community while serving as a token of appreciation for their 
service and sacrifice. This year, Elizabeth was recognized with the 
prestigious 10,000-hour pin and a custom-etched glass wedge by the 
Marine Corps League Patriot Detachment 1230 on behalf of the Navy-
Marine Corps Relief Society. Elizabeths compassion and generosity are 
a shining example of how one person can make a profound difference in 
the lives of others. Through her blankets, she has woven a tapestry of 
hope, solace, and belonging for our military families far from home.
, it is through the work of people like Elizbeth that our 
communities thrive, and our Nation grows stronger. Her actions remind 
us that progress is not forged in grand gestures, but in the cumulative 
power of selfless acts. She embodies the timeless American values of 
resilience, generosity, and compassion, showing us that the future is 
built by those who care deeply, act decisively, and give without 
hesitation.
  On behalf of Pennsylvanias First Congressional District, I extend my 
deepest gratitude to Elizabeth Todderud for her extraordinary service. 
I ask my colleagues to join me in honoring this exceptional individual, 
whose leadership and spirit of service will inspire generations to 
come. May her example remind us of the boundless potential within each 
of us to make our communities, country, and world a better place.
I rise today to recognize an 
extraordinary individual from Pennsylvanias First Congressional 
District--someone who has gone above and beyond the call of duty in 
service to both our community and our country. It is with great respect 
and admiration that I recognize Joseph A. Fluehr III, one of our 
districts distinguished Hometown Heroes.
  Hometown Heroes are not defined by titles or accolades, but by the 
quiet power of their actions. They are distinguished by their 
unwavering integrity, the strength of their character, and their 
steadfast commitment to the people and places they serve. They are the 
foundation upon our communities stand--the ones who lift others up, 
inspire hope, and, in

doing so, call us all to higher standards of service and compassion. 
Joe has embodied this spirit in ways that words can scarcely capture.
  For over five decades, Joe has been a cornerstone of our community. 
As a respected funeral director and a relentless advocate for local 
veterans, he has been a beacon of light, a guardian of dignity, and a 
true pillar of support for those who have served our Nation. Joes 
commitment to our community began when he and his wife, Christine, 
opened the Joseph A Fluehr III Funeral Home in Richboro in 1976. From 
the outset, their funeral home was more than a place of professional 
care; it became a sanctuary where families found genuine compassion and 
solace during their most challenging times.
  Joes impact on our community extends far beyond his professional 
life, and his leadership has had a transformative impact on several 
community institutions and organizations. For over a decade, Joe served 
on the Board of Trustees for St. Mary Medical Center, leading as 
Chairman for nine of those years. Under his stewardship, St. Marys 
grew into a regional hub of care, expanding its footprint, staffing, 
and services to become a Level II Trauma Center. In addition, Joe 
serves our community as a member of the Northampton Township Volunteer 
Fire Department, Tri-Hampton Rescue Squad Advisory Board, the Council 
Rock Kiwanis Invitational, Northampton Township Historical Society, and 
Northampton Township Business and Professional Association, where he 
received the recognition of ``Businessman of the Year--a truly 
fitting honor for someone who has done so much for our community.
  Yet, perhaps Joes most profound impact has been his unwavering 
advocacy for our communitys veterans. From his pivotal role in 
establishing the Washington Crossing National Cemetery to his quiet 
acts of generosity personally providing urns, nameplates, and even 
services for our unclaimed veterans, Joes profound contributions have 
ensured that the service and sacrifices of our hero veterans are 
honored, celebrated, and remembered for generations to come.
  Joes life is a shining example of what it means to serve others with 
humility and grace, consistently putting others before himself. Through 
kindness, compassion, and unwavering commitment to serving others, Joe 
has shown us all what it means to live a life of purpose, to give 
without expecting anything in return, and to leave the world better 
than we found it. Today, we honor Joseph A. Fluehr, III not just for 
his remarkable deeds but for who he is--a true hero in every sense of 
the word.
  On behalf of Pennsylvanias First Congressional District, I extend my 
deepest gratitude to Joseph A. Fluehr, III for his extraordinary 
service. I ask my colleagues to join me in honoring this exceptional 
individual, whose leadership and spirit of service will inspire 
generations to come. May his example remind us of the boundless 
potential within each of us to make our communities, country, and world 
a better place.
I rise today to recognize an 
extraordinary individual from Pennsylvanias First Congressional 
District--someone who has gone above and beyond the call of duty in 
service to both our community and our country. It is with great respect 
and admiration that I recognize Joseph

DEmidio, one of our districts distinguished Hometown Heroes.
  Hometown Heroes are not defined by titles or accolades but by the 
quiet power of their actions. They are distinguished by their 
unwavering integrity, the strength of their character, and their 
steadfast commitment to the people and places they serve. They are the 
foundation upon which our communities stand--the ones who lift others 
up, inspire hope, and, in doing so, call us all to higher standards of 
service and compassion. Joseph DEmidio has embodied this spirit in 
ways that words can scarcely capture.
  Over the last century, Joe has demonstrated the selfless service, 
dedication, integrity, and patriotism that have defined the greatest 
generation. As the world plunged into war, at just nineteen years old, 
Joe answered the call of duty, enlisted in the U.S. Navy, and soon 
found himself on the shores of England, preparing for one of the most 
pivotal moments in history: the D-Day invasion. His role aboard an LST, 
landing on the shores of Normandy, helped turn the tide in favor of the 
Allied forces and secure the freedom we cherish today. But his 
extraordinary service did not stop there; Joe went on to play a 
critical role in supporting the Allied forces during the Battle of the 
Bulge, standing firm in the face of overwhelming adversity.
  Following the war, Joe returned home to his beloved Bristol Borough 
community, where he continued to seek ways to serve and make a 
difference. As a founding member of the Third District Volunteer Fire 
Company (and their very first Captain), Joe helped establish a legacy 
of protection and care that still serves Bristol today. He also founded 
Cameo Kitchens, a successful family-run business on Mill Street for 
decades, thereby shaping the future of Bristols thriving small 
business community. In addition, Joe has been an integral member of the 
Bristol Borough Lions Club for over fifty years, where he has served 
his community with the same passion and spirit with which he defended 
our Nation and freedom.
  At 100 years old, Joe continues to serve as an inspiration to us all. 
Whether woodworking at the Bristol Borough Senior Citizen Center or 
serving as a communicant at St. Anns Catholic Church, he is a reminder 
that true greatness lies in selflessness, service, and love for family, 
faith, community, and country. Today, we honor Joseph DEmidio not just 
for his remarkable deeds, but for who he is--a true hero, in every 
sense of the word.
  On behalf of Pennsylvanias First Congressional District, I extend my 
deepest gratitude to Joseph DEmidio for his extraordinary service. I 
ask my colleagues to join me in honoring this exceptional individual, 
whose leadership and spirit of service will inspire generations to 
come. May his example remind us of the boundless potential within each 
of us to make our communities, country, and world a better place.
I rise today to recognize the River Hills 
and Lake Wylie Lions Club for its continued record of service to the 
5th District of South Carolina, and to congratulate the club for their 
celebration of their 50th anniversary.
  The River Hills and Lake Wylie Lions Club was chartered in 1975 and 
since its inception, has been a force in the Lake Wylie and Clover 
communities as the largest and most effective Lions Club in the state 
of South Carolina. The clubs 142 members have raised over $200,000 
annually. Each year, the entire amount raised goes directly to support 
over 20 charities and services.
  The Lions Club has created several of their own projects and 
organizations that focus on supporting and serving South Carolina. The 
River Hills, Lake Wylie Community Foundation was established by the 
Lions to receive funds and distribute the proceeds to charities in 
tandem with the organizations goals and with the needs of the 
community. The foundations motto is ``For Good. For Others. For Ever 
and that sentiment can be felt in the impact of this program throughout 
South Carolina.
  The Lions Club also created a partnership with Clover Schools that 
led to the establishment of Roaring Readers, which provides books for 
elementary school classrooms, helped start the Roaring Eagle Newspaper, 
and donates annual scholarships for Clover High School seniors. In 
addition, the club supports the youth throughout York County and Clover 
through Kidsight, an eyesight program that screens over 13,000 annually 
and helps pay for new glasses, eye surgeries, and hearing aids as 
needed.
  The motto of the Lions Club is ``we serve. The River Hills and Lake 
Wylie chapter carries out this mission daily and their impact can be 
seen and felt throughout our great state. Each of the people that make 
up this great organization lead with honor, joy, and compassion. They 
are the people who help make our Nation the greatest in the world. The 
Lions Club members willingly give up their time, tithe, and talent and 
live out the South Carolina motto, ``While I Breathe, I Hope. Please 
join me in expressing my heartfelt gratitude for all of their great 
work and celebrating 50 years of exemplary service.
I rise today in honor of National Spina Bifida 
Awareness Month to pay tribute to the numerous individuals and their 
families across our country living with this condition.
  Spina Bifida is a condition I am very familiar with. My sister and my 
niece both suffer from spina bifida. I know how it can impact a family.
  Spina Bifida is the nations most common permanently disabling birth 
defect-compatible with life. Spina Bifida stems from a hole in the 
spinal cord, a condition known as a neural tube defect, as the spinal 
column fails to close properly during development in the womb, and it 
impacts virtually every major organ system. Children born with Spina 
Bifida typically undergo dozens of surgeries before they become adults. 
Adults living with Spina Bifida face myriad physical health, mental 
health, and other challenges, such as unemployment and limited access 
to quality primary and specialty care.
  There are currently an estimated 166,000 individuals in the United 
States living with Spina Bifida, approximately 65 percent of whom are 
adults. This disease is now witnessing its first generation of adults, 
an incredible milestone, considering that the original designation of 
Spina Bifida as a childhood condition meant that the vast majority did 
not experience life beyond youth.
  We have taken tremendous steps forward in recent years due to 
dedicated medical research, but there is so much we still dont know.
  Unfortunately, funding for Spina Bifida is limited. The only place in 
the Federal Government that is specifically studying this complex

condition for children and adults is the Spina Bifida Program at the 
National Center on Birth Defects and Developmental Disabilities at the 
CDC through the National Spina Bifida Patient Registry and the Spina 
Bifida Collaborative Care Network.
  People with Spina Bifida deserve no less than the rest of us as we 
age. We must ensure that adults with Spina Bifida can receive high-
quality medical care and that researchers have the funds necessary to 
continue the development of treatments for spina bifida.
I ask my colleagues to join me in recognizing 
Ernest Wade Ballou on his retirement as House Legislative Counsel, 
after over forty years of service to the House of Representatives.
  Wade joined the Office of Legislative Counsel after earning his J.D. 
from the University of Virginia School of Law in 1983. Throughout his 
tenure Wade has provided nonpartisan, expert support to members of 
Congress, committees, and staff on matters related to foreign affairs, 
Native American issues, federal land, intelligence, veterans affairs, 
federal tax law, public debt, health care, Social Security, and more. I 
am pleased to have worked with Wade in his capacity supporting the 
Committee on House Administration.
  Since 2016, Wade has served as the House Legislative Counsel, leading 
the office and managing a committed team of legislative experts to 
provide the House with impartial and confidential drafting and 
counseling services for bills, amendments, resolutions, and laws. Wade 
has also been a key partner on the Congressional Data Task Force, a 
group united in their efforts to modernize and improve data 
accessibility for the public. He played a critical role in developing 
the Comparative Print Suite tool for Members and staff and has worked 
closely with the Select Committee on the Modernization of Congress, as 
well as the Subcommittee on Modernization, to implement innovative 
ideas and recommendations that will help Congress work better for the 
American people. Wades many accomplishments were recently recognized 
by the Congressional Management Foundations Democracy Award for 
Lifetime Achievement. Finally, I would be remiss if I didnt mention 
that before going to law school and joining the Office of Legislative 
Counsel, Wade was a fire fighter, an experience that likely prepared 
him well for a career in the House.
  Wade began his career serving under the fourth House Legislative 
Counsel and now he leaves as the eighth House Legislative Counsel. His 
expertise and dedication to helping us turn our policy ideas into 
concise legislative text will be sorely missed. On behalf of my 
colleagues and the entire House community, I thank him for his 
leadership and longstanding commitment to serving the Peoples House.