I rise to celebrate the Arnold 
Volunteer Engine Company No. 2 on its 100th anniversary.
  The Arnold Volunteer Engine Company No. 2 held its first meeting at 
Arnold High School on May 12, 1924. Shortly afterward, Westmoreland 
County granted the company an official charter on June 14, 1924. Its 
17 founding members dedicated their lives and work to the people of the 
Allegheny-Kiski Valley. Company No. 2 quickly became a pillar in its 
southwestern Pennsylvania community. The company constructed its first 
fire hall in 1928, which is still in use today. Additionally, the 
firefighters, efforts to engage with the community extended beyond 
protecting citizens and responding to emergencies. In 1949, they built 
a clubhouse for members, their families, and the community to gather 
and socialize. Due to continued outreach and service, they assumed the 
responsibility of transporting Santa Claus through Arnold, 
Pennsylvania, during the annual Christmas parade. This tradition 
continues today.
  Over the past hundred years, Company No. 2 operated with 
professionalism, speed, and dedication. After a destructive fire took 
the lives of three first responders in 1995, the firefighters began 
training in rapid intervention tactics and protocols. Company No. 2 
still provides this rapid intervention training to fire companies 
around the Allegheny-Kiski Valley area. The volunteer firefighters of 
Company No. 2 remain focused on sharing their expertise and working 
with other fire companies to ensure all first responders are trained 
and ready to respond to emergencies effectively.
  There are 42 active members of the Arnold Volunteer Engine Company 
No. 2. Notably, five charter members of the inaugural Junior 
Firefighter Program are celebrating 50 years of volunteer service. I 
want to thank and honor James Duncan, Donald Ferrante, Joseph Puet, 
John Tort, Jr., and William Weber for their devotion to the people of 
southwestern Pennsylvania.
, on behalf of the people of Pennsylvanias 14th 
Congressional District, I congratulate Arnold Volunteer Engine Company 
No. 2 on its 100th anniversary and its great work serving the 
community.
I rise to celebrate the life of an 
extraordinary Marylander, John ``Paul Molloy, who we lost two years 
ago this week. Paul was a public servant and a former Capitol Hill 
staffer with a storied career in both the House and Senate, having 
helped craft and pass such landmark laws as the National Rail Passenger 
Act of 1970 establishing AMTRAK, the Resource Recovery and Conservation 
Act of 1976, the nations bedrock law governing the safe disposal of 
solid and hazardous waste. He was always committed to bipartisanship 
and insisted on celebrating the passage of every bipartisan law with 
the teams--Democrats and Republicans alike--who made them happen. Even 
in the midst of all these professional achievements, all was not as it 
seemed. In 1975, Paul found himself living on the streets, divorced and 
alone because of his stubborn battle with alcoholism.
  Fortunately, Paul was able to seek help and begin the long road to 
recovery. He checked himself into a Montgomery County-run halfway house 
in Silver Spring. This started a new chapter in his life that would in 
turn come to touch the lives of so many others in similar situations.
  When the County-run halfway house closed, Paul joined with his fellow 
residents to take over the houses management. They all agreed: they 
would split the rent and utilities equally; they would all contribute 
to the cooking and cleaning together; and they would accompany one 
another to treatment. If anyone relapsed, they would have to leave to 
protect the health of their fellow residents. They called this new 
sober-supportive living environment ``Oxford House, and began a new 
addiction recovery model that would spread across the country and the 
world. Today, there are over 3,300 Oxford Houses helping people 
maintain their sobriety in a supportive environment.
  The reason the first Oxford House wasnt the only Oxford House is 
simple--one of its cofounders was a congressional staffer. Paul had the 
knowledge, experience and contacts that proved instrumental in passing 
provisions in the Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1988 that created a revolving 
loan fund for supportive sobriety models like Oxford House. This fund 
was instrumental in establishing the network of recovery residences 
that has spread across the country.
  From the 1980s until the end of his life, Paul found renewed purpose 
as the Director of Oxford House, overseeing its resident-driven 
expansion into new neighborhoods and new states. Even as Paul carefully 
stewarded the expansion of new Oxford Houses, he was

careful to maintain the organizational commitment to democratic self-
governance within each house, which has empowered generations of Oxford 
House residents to navigate the inevitable obstacles of life with 
persistence and patience.
  After his recovery, Paul and his wife, Jane, decided to remarry, and 
enjoyed another 34 years together. When he passed away two years ago, 
Paul left behind not only his beloved Jane but his five children and 
eight grandchildren. He is sorely missed, but his legacy of good humor 
and incomparable compassion lives on among his family and Oxford House 
family. I join the people of Marylands beautiful Eighth District and 
people across the United States in expressing the warmest gratitude for 
Pauls work as we celebrate his life.
I rise today to commemorate and honor 
the Tuskegee Airmen as we celebrate their 83rd anniversary. As the 
United States fought to defend freedom with our allies in World War II, 
exceptional pilots in the fight for air superiority made the difference 
between victory and defeat.
  The Tuskegee Airmen stand out in history, as they not only had to 
carry the immeasurable weight of battle, but also had to fight racial 
discrimination.
  Prior to the Tuskegee Airmens incorporation in 1941, the military 
was segregated, and the Army Air Forces did not accept African American 
pilots. In the face of this discrimination, these brave men stood up 
when their country and the world needed them most. They flew with skill 
and courage on critical missions, demonstrating that excellence knows 
no color, and that discrimination had no place in our military. The 
Tuskegee Airmen were among the most talented and decorated squadrons of 
World War II, earning 3 Presidential Unit Citations, 150 Distinguished 
Flying Crosses, 1 Legion of Merit, 1 Silver Star, 2 Soldier Medals, 8 
Purple Hearts, 14 bronze stars, 744 air medals, and 1 Red Star of 
Yugoslavia. Their heroism, bravery, and remarkable achievements 
contributed directly to the desegregation of the United States 
Military.
  On Saturday, May 25, 2024, veterans, officials, airmen, and their 
decedents gathered at Wings of Eagles Discovery Center to remember 
these amazing heroes and commemorate their significance nationally and 
their deep local ties to our community here in the Finger Lakes, 
Southern Tier, and Western New York. Their story will forever serve as 
a symbol of courage in the face of adversity.
  On Memorial Day and every day, we thank the men and women in uniform 
who have sacrificed so much so that we may live free. We owe them a 
debt of gratitude that cannot be repaid, both for defending our 
Nations freedoms and advancing them for generations to come.
I rise today to honor St. Clair Rotary 
Club and the occasion of their 100th anniversary. Since its founding on 
April 22, 1924, the St. Clair Rotary Club has served as an emblematic 
example of the Rotarys motto, ``Service Above Self.
  Throughout the last century, the St. Clair Rotary Club has focused on 
a lot of community projects benefitting the St. Clair community. 
Notably, during the 1930s, the club began a student assistance program, 
helping high school graduates work towards higher education. In 1964, 
the club started the ``Preparation for Employment program with St. 
Clair High School and soon after in 1965, the ``Seminars for Tomorrows 
Leaders which continues to this day.
  The club has managed to preserve their accomplishments and history at 
the St. Clair Historical Museum, dating back to its founding in 1924. 
Their team has a remarkable devotion not only to the improvement of the 
St. Clair Community, but the preservation of the clubs rich history. 
More recently, the club has also notably raised over $150,000 for the 
St. Clair Little League Park, donated 32 Chromebooks to the St. Clair 
High School, and led efforts for community spaces throughout St. Clair. 
As the club celebrates its centennial, it continues to make a 
difference through projects like the Storybook Walk in Klecha Park and 
the renovation of Rotarys Wildlife Landing.
, I have no doubt that the St. Clair Rotary Club will 
continue to be a significant benefactor to the wider St. Clair 
Community for many years to come. I ask my colleagues to join me in 
congratulating the club and its members for reaching this incredible 
milestone.
I rise today to recognize Colonel Carlos 
`Slinger Berdecia of the United States Air Force upon his retirement 
from the U.S. Military after more than 23 years of service.
  Colonel Berdecia was born and raised in Bayamon, Puerto Rico, and 
graduated from the University of North Carolina with a Bachelor of 
Science in marketing. He also holds a Master of Business Administration 
from the City University of Seattle. Colonel Berdecia began his flying 
career in 2003 at Joint Base Lewis McChord in Washington State, flying 
the C-17A Globemaster III with the 8th and 10th Airlift Squadrons. He 
quickly upgraded in the `Mighty Moose from Co-Pilot to Instructor 
Pilot in just four years, flying combat operations in Iraq and 
Afghanistan. After his assignment at McChord, Colonel Berdecia taught 
the newest C-17A pilots in the 58th Airlift Squadron at Altus Air Force 
Base, Oklahoma. There, he was accepted to the United States Air Force 
Weapons School, where he graduated in 2009 and earned the callsign 
`Slinger.
  After his time at Altus, Colonel Berdecia moved to Charleston, South 
Carolina, and became a member of the Special Operations Low Level 
community in the 16th Airlift Squadron, where he executed missions in 
support of the Combined Joint Chiefs of Staff. In 2014, he was selected 
to work as the AFRICOM J3s Executive Officer in Stuttgart, Germany, 
and in 2017, was chosen to return to Altus and Command his previous 
Squadron, the 58th Airlift Squadron `Rat Pack. Due the trust and 
confidence his leadership had in his ability to lead, Colonel Berdecia 
was selected as a Secretary of Defense Executive Fellow with Team 
Rubicon in Los Angeles, California. After his time in Los Angeles, 
Slinger was assigned to the Pentagon, and after a tour on staff with 
the Joint Staff, he was brought back to the C-17A. His final assignment 
in the Air Force was that of the 437th Operations Group Commander at 
Joint Base Charleston, South Carolina, leading the men and women of Air 
Mobility Commands Premier Operations Group.
  Colonel Berdecias exemplary service to the United States Air Force 
spans more than 23 years and 5,000 hours in airlift aircraft. Mr. 
Speaker, on behalf of my Congressional colleagues and a grateful 
country, I extend our deepest appreciation to Colonel Carlos `Slinger 
Berdecia and his wife Eva for their dedicated service to the United 
States Air Force and our country.
I would like to honor and congratulate Scott 
Wheeler on his retirement from Midwest Communications Peoria stations 
after 46 years in the industry.
  Scott Wheeler was hired as a radio personality and promotions 
director by the Top-40 radio station KZ93-FM in 1987. During his 
career, he worked as a director of production, promotions, programming, 
and operations. Wheeler also held the positions of Morning Show Host, 
Brand Manager, and Air Personality. In 1997, he launched Big Oldies 
93.3 which received the top ratings throughout its 10-year duration.
  During his time as a radio personality, Scott Wheeler has been 
recognized with numerous accolades for his exemplary professional 
performance. He was recognized as one of Radio Ink Magazines ``Top Ten 
Best Small Market Program Directors in America from 1999 until 2003. 
Wheeler was known for his tremendous contributions to the radio 
community, as well as his success at CHR KZ93 and Big Oldies 93.3.
  Scott Wheeler has always been committed to his work and his 
community. It is my privilege to congratulate him on his accomplished 
career as a radio personality. We have all been blessed to have Scott 
Wheeler on our radio. The City of Peoria is a better place because of 
his airtime presence.
today I rise to honor and celebrate the 
remarkable tenure of Hood College President, Andrea E. Chapdelaine. For 
nine years, Dr. Chapdelaine has dedicated her career to the advancement 
of higher education, enriching the lives of students and bolstering 
local communities throughout her career.
  Under her leadership, Hood College experienced growth in both 
undergraduate and graduate enrollment and improvement in student 
retention. Dr. Chapdelaine spearheaded the completion of the strategic 
plan, ``Moving Together Beyond Boundaries, which introduced new 
academic programs, expanded strategic partnerships, and enhanced 
employee compensation.
  She oversaw nearly $100 million in campus investments, including 
major renovations and new construction, led the successful ``Forging 
the Future campaign, and raised nearly $75 million for scholarships, 
experiential learning, and the Hood Fund. Her tenure also saw the 
receipt of a historic $54 million gift from The Hodson Trust, marking 
the largest donation in Hood Colleges history.
  It is a privilege to acknowledge Dr. Andrea E. Chapdelaines service 
and support for higher education. Her legacy will undoubtedly inspire 
future leaders and continue to benefit Hood College students and the 
broader community for years to come.
I rise to include in the Record the 
following Proclamation honoring the Black Angels of Staten Island:
  Whereas Staten Island Sea View Hospital opened in 1913 specifically 
to treat patients with Tuberculosis and, at its peak, Sea View Hospital 
saw nearly 2,000 patients and was one of only four municipal hospitals 
in New York City that did not discriminate against Black nurses;
  Whereas the Black Angels, as they are known, were courageous, 
dedicated, and bold in answering the call to come to Sea View and risk 
their lives caring for the grievously sick and ``indigent 
consumptives of New York City, who had been banished to this woefully 
understaffed sanatorium;
  Whereas the Black Angels caring demeanor, and years of expertise 
played a significant role in the first ever human trials of Isoniazid, 
the first drug to cure tuberculosis. Since its discovery in 1952, tens 
of millions of lives have been saved;
  Whereas the Black Angels were activists and active members of the 
NAACP, neighborhood churches, and community groups, and became founding 
members of the Lincoln Hospital Alumni Association, the Urban League 
Guild, and the Womens Civic and Political Union. They were fierce 
advocates for the integration of Black nurses into the U.S. military 
and American Nurses Association, and in New York City they worked 
toward desegregating the hospital system; and
  Whereas the people of Staten Island are grateful for the years of 
service by all the Black Angels who selflessly served on the front 
lines at Sea View Hospital to treat tuberculosis patients.
I am proud to introduce the bipartisan Eid 
Day Act, which would create a federal holiday for Eid. I thank Rep. 
Grace Meng and my other House colleagues that joined me to support this 
bill. Eid al-Adha is an Islamic holiday which commemorates Abrahams 
symbolic sacrifice of his son to God, as referenced in the Quran, Old 
Testament, and New Testament. Eid al-Adha also marks the annual 
pilgrimage to Mecca, called Hajj. Eid al-Fitr is an Islamic holiday 
which commemorates the sighting of the new moon, signifying a month-
long end to fasting and reflection for all Muslim followers.
  Eid is a holiday of great importance to over 3.5 million American 
Muslims. Whether it be in the military, government, health, business or 
other leadership positions, Muslim Americans have always contributed to 
our country. Eid is a meaningful occasion for the Muslim community to 
reflect and celebrate on the importance of faith, sacrifice, freedom, 
and justice--the same values that all Americans hold dear. This year, 
Eid al-Adha will be celebrated on June 16th. We must continually strive 
to create a more inclusive nation and honor the diverse tapestry that 
makes up this country. Muslim Americans have meaningfully contributed 
to the American society since the nations early history. They cherish 
American values, take pride in the countrys pluralism, 
multiculturalism, and its embodiment as the land of liberty and 
opportunity.
  Recognizing Eid as a Federal Holiday will allow them to not only 
freely practice their faith, but also help them feel more at home and 
connect better with Americas spirit as a religious minority. This bill 
is particularly timely given the alienation that parts of the Muslim 
American community feel after years of anti-Muslim sentiments as well 
as recent developments in the Middle-East. As Members of Congress, we 
need to uphold the values that our nation was founded on, including 
freedom of religion and equality for all.
, I hope my colleagues will join me in recognizing and 
uplifting this important cultural and historical celebration by making 
Eid a federal holiday.
I was unable to vote on Thursday, June 13. 
Had I been present, I would have voted NAY on Roll Call No. 261; NAY on 
Roll Call No. 262; NAY on Roll Call No. 263; NAY on Roll Call No. 264; 
NAY on Roll Call No. 265; NAY on Roll Call No. 266; NAY on Roll Call 
No. 267; NAY on Roll Call No. 268; NAY on Roll Call No. 269; NAY on 
Roll Call No. 270; NAY on Roll Call No. 271; NAY on Roll Call No. 272; 
NAY on Roll Call No. 273; NAY on Roll Call No. 274; and NAY on Roll 
Call No. 275.
I rise today to recognize and 
commemorate Balram Bheodari, a constituent of Georgias Fighting Fifth 
Congressional District who was instrumental to the success and growth 
of Hartsfield-Jackson Atlanta International Airport.
  Known to everyone in Atlanta as ``B, he brought the sense of duty 
forged during his time as an Army aviator to his 22 years of service to 
the airport. As General Manager for

Hartsfield-Jackson, he was pivotal in the airports growth and its 
recognition as the worlds busiest and most efficient airport.
  Under Bs leadership the airport completed numerous major capital 
projects, making use of transformative investments totaling billions of 
dollars and positioning Hartsfield-Jackson as the model of success for 
all large airport hubs across the nation. B oversaw pivotal projects 
such as the creation of the airports fifth runway, the Consolidated 
Rental Car Center, the Maynard H. Jackson International Terminal--the 
most extensive hold baggage screening system in the country, and 
countless other terminal renovation projects.
  Bs expertise in the airport and aviation space has been invaluable 
as he and I worked closely to deliver future projects through the 
Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act to continue to grow Atlantas 
airport.
  But its not just the billions of dollars he helped deliver to the 
airport that made B a great General Manager, it was Bs leadership and 
the ability to reinforce his mission and vision to over 63,000 
employees at Hansfield-Jackson and the 400,000 jobs supported by the 
airport. His mission was to bring all those directly or indirectly 
employed to see themselves as one team, delivering excellence while 
connecting our community to the world.
  During unprecedented times like the COVID-19 pandemic, Bs leadership 
and management were critical. He weathered the operational and 
commercial challenges that came with the pandemic through close 
coordination with airline partners and his team. B understood what made 
Hartsfield-Jackson the busiest and most efficient airport in the world 
was a commitment to an excellent customer experience. He delivered on 
that even through the challenges of a global pandemic.
  His philosophy centered around three Ps: ``People, Purpose, and 
Performance. Bs philosophy helped make Hartsfield-Jackson the 
largest employer in the state of Georgia and contributed to a regional 
economic impact of 66 billion dollars. Numbers cant tell the whole 
story of Bs impact, and for the past two years, Hartsfield-Jackson has 
been awarded the ACI-Airport Service Quality award for the Best Airport 
in the world for arrivals.
  Today, I honor and celebrate Bs service, commitment and contribution 
to the Fighting Fifth, and while I will miss our conversations and his 
physical presence in the airport, I want it to be known in the halls of 
Congress that our success in the district was made possible by my 
friend and Co-Conspirator for Justice, Balram ``B Bheodari. Please 
join me in recognizing Bs outstanding career in service to Hartsfield-
Jackson Atlanta International Airport and Georgias Fighting Fifth 
Congressional District.
I rise today to honor the distinguished 
career of David Lecik. After 37 years of dedicated service in state 
government, 12 of which were spent working with the Illinois Department 
on Agings Senior Health Insurance Program, Mr. Lecik will be retiring 
as Education Specialist and technical expert on Medicare and Medicaid, 
and he will be missed by many.
U.S. Air Force for 12 years while married to 
his wife Sheila and raising three children, Stephen, Dan, and Rosemary. 
His armed forces career started as a dental assistant, and he later 
retrained in computer operations. He was stationed in Maryland, 
Southern Illinois, and Athens, Greece and rose to the rank of Master 
Sergeant.
  After the Air Force, Mr. Lecik worked for Victor J. Andrew High 
School in Tinley Park while earning a bachelors degree in psychology 
at Governors State University. In 1997 he was hired by the State of 
Illinois at the Department of Human Services (DHS) and worked as a 
Human Service Caseworker and Staff Development Specialist. The work at 
DHS laid the foundation for his incredible ability to teach advocates 
and counselors on Medicare and the many benefits that are offered to 
Illinois citizens.
-SHIP in 2012 and 
mastered the Medicare program. Davids dedication to serving older 
adults, people with disabilities, and their caregivers across the State 
of Illinois is remarkable. His passion to ensure access to quality 
healthcare for Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries has been at the 
forefront of his career. He shared his knowledge and talents with the 
1,000 SHIP counselors who work with both Medicare and Medicaid programs 
to assist eligible beneficiaries with lifesaving programs and benefits. 
He re-wrote the training manual for SHIP and restructured charts and 
desk aids that summarized difficult subjects for optimal understanding.
  His ability to explain the medical programs for seniors and the 
technical support he has given to hundreds of SHIP counselors is 
exceptional as he has championed high quality education and advocacy 
within in the SHIP program. Mr. Lecik has not only supported Medicare 
recipients by providing counseling to ensure they retain and navigate 
their health care benefits but has also been a pillar of support for 
Senior Health Insurance Program (SHIP) counselors and professionals 
throughout the State by helping them navigate the complex Medicare and 
Medicaid systems. He has provided countless older adults and 
professionals with the information needed to make informed decisions 
about their benefits and championed for the most vulnerable and limited 
income beneficiaries to ensure they have quality health coverage.
(City of Chicago, Cook County Courts system, and AFSCME), case 
managers, caseworkers, and advocates from every area of the state. 
During his career at SHIP and has attended and spoken at national 
conferences, the Age + Action conference, and has worked with 
legislators to bring Medicare/Medicaid education to beneficiaries in 
many local areas of the state. He has worked closely with Social 
Security outreach staff, liaisons with the Centers for Medicare and 
Medicaid Services, and the state agency--Healthcare and Family 
Services. Dave is known throughout the country for his knowledge and 
expertise with SHIP. He never steers away from a challenge, and he 
sticks with an issue until it is solved to a successful end.
  On behalf of the United States House of Representatives, I thank 
David Lecik for all the work he has done for the citizens of Illinois. 
We are so grateful for his invaluable service and wish him the best of 
everything in his future endeavors.