the dynamic Republic of 
Bulgaria is leading the way in energy independence, eliminating 
intimidation by the war criminal Putin who is sacrificing young 
Russians to death for his personal gain of money and power.
  Prime Minister Nikolai Denkov is a vrsionarv, meeting last week with 
Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskyy in Sofia and facilitating 
Bulgaria selling two Russian-made nuclear reactors and other critical 
equipment to Ukraine.
  It is inspiring that the National Assembly on July 6th voted for 
Bulgaria to benefit from the sale. This corrects failed efforts from 
the 1980s of a technically and commercially flawed project, as 
identified by the Wall Street Journal on July 7th.
  ``The deal shows how Russias energy influence in Europe is 
diminishing fast, said Martin Vladimirov, Director of the Energy 
Program at the Center for the Study of Democracy in Sofia.
  The people of Bulgaria and Ukraine mutually benefit as clearly 
explained by Assembly Member, Delyan Dobrev ``After the start of the

war in Ukraine, building a power plant with that equipment became 
is a perfect match.
  The association of Bulgaria and Ukraine for energy liberation is 
another extraordinary example of the war criminal Putins 
miscalculation of the courageous people of Ukraine who have resisted 
valiantly for freedom. In America, Republicans and Democrats have 
united to support Ukraine with 100 billion dollars in aid. The European 
Union of 27 nations is reaching 100 billion dollars in aid. Germany has 
reversed neutrality to unprecedented support of Ukraine as NATO has 
achieved the remarkable inclusion of Finland and imminently Sweden with 
strong support from Japan, Republic of Korea, and Australia.
  This year marks 120 years of diplomatic relations between Bulgaria 
and America. Americans are so appreciative of the friendship with the 
talented people of Bulgaria as we rally together for mutual economic 
and security benefit. Bulgaria is well represented in Washington with 
Ambassador Georgi Panayotov as South Carolina appreciates the honorary 
Bulgarian Consul Don Tomlin of Columbia. The bi-partisan Bulgaria 
Caucus in Congress promotes warm relations with Democratic Congressman 
Brad Schneider and me as Republican Co-chairman.
I rise today to celebrate the 100th 
Anniversary of the Dickerson Park Zoo located in Springfield, Missouri.
  The zoo was founded in 1923 on 100 acres of land that was acquired 
from the estate of Jerome Dickerson. It houses more than 500 animals 
that represent 160 different species. Last year alone, some 200,000 
people visited the zoo.
  But the zoo is more than a location where visitors can see exotic 
animals. A staff of about 60 full-time and 25 seasonal employees, as 
well as 100 volunteers, are dedicated to the mission of connecting 
people with animals to encourage discovery and inspire conservation. In 
1985, the park became involved with the Species Survival Plan, a 
consortium of groups working to save animals from extinction. The 
following year, the zoo became accredited by the Association of Zoos 
and Aquariums.
  More than 60,000 people a year participate in the zoos conservation 
education programs held in the parks educational center. Additionally, 
its Zoo to You programs visit schools, libraries and residential care 
centers around the state.
  The zoo also provides outstanding research and medical care for all 
the animals and rehabilitates injured or orphaned native raptors 
through its Raptor Rehabilitation Program. Once the birds are deemed 
healthy enough to survive on their own, they are released back into 
their natural habitat. The zoo also is one of only five in the country 
that participates in a giraffe blood bank, and it recently became home 
for an orphaned cougar cub from the state of Washington.
  Just like humans, preventive care is paramount for the animals and 
the zookeepers play an important role in the wellness staff as they 
spend a great deal of time with the animals and become very perceptive 
to subtle changes in an animals health.
  The Dickerson Park Zoo is a vital part of animal education, 
conservation and enjoyment for thousands of people living in and 
visiting the Springfield area. We celebrate them and wish them the best 
for another 100 years.
I rise today to honor and commend Colonel 
Kirby Gross on his retirement.
  Colonel Kirby Gross has served in the United States Army as a trauma 
surgeon for a span of 21 years. He has been deployed 10 times totaling 
over 5 years of combat service. Colonel Gross has served for 5 years of 
combat service, after being deployed a total of 10 times. Throughout 
Colonel Grosss career, he served in many positions that increased his 
positive influence on the lives of others.
  During his 21 years of service, Colonel Gross served twice as the 
Joint Theater Trauma System Director, and the Theater Medical Director 
for Operation Inherent Resolve. Here, he was able to develop medical 
assets which provided care to injured soldiers within the theater, 
therefore improving battlefield care. Throughout his many positions, he 
was able to demonstrate empathy towards warriors, aiding many in their 
return to good health.
  Colonel Gross served the country in many important and influential 
roles. He worked as the Commander of the 772nd Forward Surgical Team 
(FST) to Iraq, which is where he assumed the role of Chief of Surgery 
of the 10th Combat Support Hospital Directors of the Joint Trauma 
System (JTS), Chief of Defense Medical Readiness Training Institute 
(DMRTI), and Chief of Surgery of the Army Trauma Training Detachment 
(ATTD). He has been able to use his roles to improve care for wounded 
warriors, positively impacting their families and our Nation.
  Today, Colonel Gross works diligently as an Army Trauma Surgeon in 
the Division of Trauma within the Section of Military, Diplomatic, and 
Field Surgical Affairs at Cooper University Health Care as part of the 
Army Medical Department, Military-Civilian Trauma Team Training 
Program. Colonel Grosss work has affected the lives of many, as he 
improved the survivability of soldiers throughout the Global War on 
Terrorism. His actions have influenced and encouraged an environment of 
achievement that will assuredly increase the survivability rate of 
military campaigns for our country.
, I ask you to join me in honoring and commending Colonel 
Kirby Gross, on behalf of a grateful nation for his dedication to our 
country and those who have bravely served and defended the United 
States of America to the best of his ability.
  Be it known to all, that I hereby honor Colonel Kirby Gross, and 
extend great appreciation for outstanding service to our community.
I rise today to honor a 
remarkable person, Nick Wallace. He is a celebrated executive chef, 
entrepreneur, and philanthropist, who leverages his innate talents to 
highlight the beauty of food, redefine the Southern experience, and 
introduce the world to Mississippi-inspired cuisine.
  Drawing inspiration from his early training with his grandmothers, 
Nicks culinary style combines his family-farm origin with French 
technique, resulting in a modern, Mississippi-influenced cuisine 
infused with Nicks own culinary innovation experience and 
understanding of flavor profiles.
  Nick is the owner of CHURN Creameries 2022, Nick Wallace Culinary, 
Nick Wallace Catering, and Nissan Cafe by Nick Wallace. In addition to 
flexing his leadership skills as an executive chef at some of Americas 
prominent museums and hotels, Nick has been featured in domestic and 
international television programming, including Food Networks Comfort 
Nation (Season 2); Chopped, Chopped: Altons Challenge, and Cutthroat 
Kitchen; Food Network Canadas Firemasters; and Voyages (France) 
Unexplored America--Mississippi. Most recently, Nick appeared on 
Bravos Top Chef (Season 19) and CNNs NOMAD with Carlton McCoy.
  Through the years, Nick has garnered regional and national 
recognition, including being selected by the James Beard Foundation to 
present five Mississippi-themed dinners in New York City; participating 
in 50 States--50 Chefs (Flavored Nation); being named ``Best Chef of 
Mississippi (2020; gaining consistent inclusion in the peer reviewed 
``Best Chefs America list; and earning ``Best Chef (Jackson, MS) 
recognition for 4 consecutive years.
  Additionally, Nick is the founder of Creativity Kitchen, a nonprofit 
aimed at providing nutrition education, exposure to farm-to-table 
practices, and access to flavorful, healthy meals and culinary 
experiences for young, public-school students and their families 
(Jackson, MS). Most recently, Creativity Kitchen partnered with Whole 
Foods 5 percent Community Giving Program, helping to add a percentage 
of store profits as donations to an area elementary school.
  Committed to his community and using palate-pleasing cuisine to touch 
lives, Nick is a Co-Chair of Share the Gulf and a board member for 
Hunger Free America. He also participates in partnerships with 
organizations such as the American Cancer Society, Dole, Novo Nordisk, 
and Partnership for a Healthy Mississippi.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in recognizing my former 
staff member, Nick Wallace for his dedication to the food insecurities 
within the state of Mississippi.
I am honored to celebrate the well-
deserved retirement of Dr. Marc A. Nigliazzo, who has worked tirelessly 
to serve the communities of Central Texas through his time at Temple 
College and Texas A&amp;M University-Central Texas. Nigliazzos dedication 
to our home is truly unrivaled.
  Throughout his career, Dr. Nigliazzo has touched the lives of all his 
students. From his time as president at Temple College to his tenure as 
the inaugural president at Texas A&amp;M-Central Texas he always went the 
extra mile to insure a positive impact on his students and the 
community.
  Dr. Nigliazzo has played a vital role in promoting accelerated 
learning as well as building safe and supportive school communities for 
our central Texas communities. His dedication to education and 
addressing the major challenges that Texas A&amp;M University-Central Texas 
has faced has brought the school to where it is today.
  His great work has not gone unnoticed. Dr. Nigliazzo was awarded the 
Leopard Pride for his work with the Temple College athletic program and 
the Temple College Board of Trustees named the administration building 
in his honor. These tributes speak to the justifiably high regard his 
peers hold him in.
  Retirement is to be celebrated and enjoyed. It is not the end of a 
career, but rather the beginning of a new adventure. I commend Dr. Marc 
A. Nigliazzo for his years of selfless service as well as his 
commitment to the betterment of higher education. He is an inspiration 
to our community, and I wish him only the best in the years ahead.
I rise to honor the Vietnam and Korean War 
veterans who traveled to Washington, D.C. on July 12, 2023, with Honor 
Flight Chicago, a program that provides WWII, Vietnam, and Korean War 
veterans the opportunity to visit their memorials on The National Mall 
in Washington, D.C. These memorials were built to honor their courage 
and service to their country.
  The American Veteran is one of our greatest treasures. The Soldiers, 
Airmen, Sailors, Marines, and Coast Guardsmen, who traveled here on 
June 12th answered our Nations call to service during one of its 
greatest times of need. From the Pacific Asian Theatre to the Korean 
Theater, these brave Americans risked life and limb, gave service and 
sacrificed much, all while embodying what it is to be a hero. We owe 
them more gratitude than can ever be expressed.
  I welcome these brave veterans to Washington and to their memorials. 
I am proud to include in the Record the names of these men and women 
for all to see, hear, and recognize, and I call on my colleagues to 
rise and join me in expressing gratitude.
  David Lee Allen, Louis Allen, William Paul Altgilbers, Ronald Michael 
Andrus, Oray Baker, Jr., Randy Barham, Donald Barker, John C. Baumgart, 
Dennis L. Behnke, Norman Bowens, Jr., Leroy Allen Buss, Duane A. 
Buttell, Jr., Freddie Cagle, David B. Carlyon, Thomas Cellini, Louis J. 
Cicchetti, Louis E. Ciesla, Henry Clark, James Darcy, James R. 
Davidson, Steven L. Devereaux, Richard Jesus Diaz, Vincent Domino, 
Ildephonse J. Dorado, Leslie Duncan, Gerald Fedyski, Hal Melland 
Finkle, Frank Freemont Fisher, William G. Fountas, Herbert E. Fuqua, 
Joseph P. Gagliano, Robert Halvey, Kenneth George Hauser, Phillip F. 
Hauze, Bruce Ramond Heldt, John E. Hielema, James Richard Hoder, James 
R. Hoder, Robert Horwath, Thom Howell, Ronald E. Johnson, Anthony 
Juszynski, Ted Alan Kachlic, Louis Kahn, George J. Kane, William Keogh, 
Randall J. Kethcart, Fred E. Kogler, Mitchell Koonce, Lawrence J. 
Kozak, Thomas W. Krakowski, James R. Kramer, Richard Krol, Leonard J. 
Kulasa, Madore Lanoue, Richard A. Luemen, Renzo Manfredini, Julius M. 
Marbury, Costante James Martello, Daniel Martinez, Michael H. Masello, 
Dwight Mayberry, Patrick E. McDonald, Terrence McHugh, Roy Meldahl, 
Wayne Raymond Melichar, Jr., Michael W. Micetic, Robert J. Miller, Sr., 
James J. Morgan, Eugene J. Mudgett, Kenneth J. Murawski, Richard J. 
Otto, Lawrence Pagliaro, Terry Pappas, George J. Parsons, Jr., John E.

Pasala, Scott G. Phillips, Leonard Porter, John J. Quigley, Terrance J. 
Quigley, David M. Ramirez, Michael Alexander Rechenmacher, Theodore 
Rounds, Andrew Rueb, Jr., Dennis Joseph Ryczek, Eugene Rymut, Jerome 
Rymut, Edward Saibert, Richard Sandine, James Sawyer, Russell P. 
Scardigli, Monroe Smith, Jr., Michael E. Sons, Dennis Soroka, Ronald 
Stark, Grant E. Steeve, Donald F. Swift, Irvin Termuende, Raymond 
Travis, William L. Troth, Stanley Tylinski, Harry E. VanBeek, Richard 
Lynn Wagner, John Joseph Wagner, Jr., William Ward, James Robert 
Wasser, Sr., William E. Watters, Howard Westphal, Frank L. White, 
Ronald G. Williams, Francis S. Willsey, George M. Wolk, Donald 
Yozeitis, Laverne C. Zorbaugh, Joseph B. Zych.
I rise today to honor Mr. 
Patrick Gallagher of Pittsburgh, PA.
  After nearly a decade serving as Chancellor of the University of 
Pittsburgh, a tenure that included tremendous gains in Pitts academic 
profile and demand, solidified the Universitys role as a community 
partner and anchor, and elevated Pitts research stature, impact, and 
activity to near-peerless echelons of excellence, Mr. Gallagher will 
step down on July 15, 2023.
  Over the course of Mr. Gallaghers Chancellorship, he enhanced the 
University of Pittsburghs reputation as an economic engine for 
Pennsylvania. One out of every 32 Pennsylvania workers earns their 
degree from Pitt, resulting in $5.2 billion in economic impact during 
his time. He has also positioned Pitt to continue this record, shaping 
the Universitys future through facilities like The Assembly, Pitt 
BioForge, and Victory Heights.
  These future projects are part and parcel of Mr. Gallaghers 
commitment to the Universitys student body. Pitt student-athletes 
flourished under Patrick Gallaghers watch, earning 4 ACC championships 
in volleyball, 2 College Cup appearances for mens soccer, 1 conference 
championship in football, and 1 national wrestling championship. And 
while the Universitys applications for admission rose to record highs 
under his tenure, he ensured that tuition rates would remain affordable 
for Pennsylvanians through Pitts strong relationship with the 
Commonwealth.
  Under Mr. Gallaghers leadership, the University provided 
unprecedented support to its world-class researchers and its 
surrounding community. Today, the University ranks third in the country 
in terms of funding from the National Institutes of Health and secured 
its status and is one of just 24 universities nationwide to reach and 
exceed $1 billion in sponsored research expenditures.
  With these numerous accomplishments, Mr. Gallagher departs with the 
sincere appreciation and respect of the Board of Trustees as well as 
the admiration of Pitts administration, faculty, staff, students, and 
alumni. Now, therefore, let it be proclaimed that the retirement of 
Chancellor Patrick D. Gallagher by celebrated and commended by all for 
exemplary leadership and remarkable contributions to higher education 
in Pennsylvania.
I include in the Record an article written 
by Williamson M. Evers of California. His works explains major flaws in 
the draft of the California State Board of Educations K-12 mathematics 
instructional framework. The Board is having a final hearing today.

       Just as there is a science of reading instruction, there is 
     a science of math instruction. The scientific way of teaching 
     math includes:
       having students memorize math facts (like multiplication 
     tables and addition and subtraction facts) and standard 
     algorithms (time-tested math procedures):
       teaching computational procedures and conceptual 
     understanding together (and not as progressives would have 
     it, concepts before procedures);
       stressing that getting answers to problems right and doing 
     so quickly are components of math fluency; and
       bearing in mind that committing math facts and procedures 
     to long-term memory frees the students mind to handle novel 
     problems.
       Instead, the progressive-education authors of the math 
     framework want students to learn through their own inquiry 
     and self-discovery. The authors give little emphasis to 
     mastery of facts and standard algorithms. The authors want to 
     organize math instruction not in the architectonic system of 
     increasing abstraction in which it has traditionally been 
     taught, but instead in accordance with vague, billowy ``big 
     ideas. Educational researcher Tom Loveless (retired from 
     the Brookings lnstitution) says: ``The previous framework was 
     very clear that math fluency involves speed and accuracy. The 
     proposed framework rejects speed as being even part of 
     fluency, and thats a problem.
       The newly revised framework delays fluency in 
     multiplication and division tables until late in elementary 
     school. This delay will spill over into subsequent math 
     learning, and Loveless believes that many students will be 
     unprepared for Algebra I even by ninth grade.
       As I have written before (with my co-author, the late Zeev 
     Wurman):
       The framework promotes only the progressive-education 
     approach to teaching math, calling it ``student-led 
     instruction, ``active learning, ``active inquiry, and 
     ``collaborative instruction. But evidence from the 1950s 
     through recent times shows that this way of teaching math is 
     ineffective. That evidence comes from scrutinizing carefully 
     designed studies featuring randomized control and what are 
     called quasi-experiments, which approximate the effect of a 
     randomized assignment of students to different groups. Quasi-
     experiments look at cases, for example, where two adjoining 
     districts with similar populations or two adjoining similar 
     schools adopt different policies. Both sorts of studies are 
     much stronger evidence than the case studies that progressive 
     educators rely on.
       In the spring 2012 issue of American Educator, the magazine 
     of the American Federation of Teachers, top educational 
     psychologists Richard E. Clark, Paul A. Kirschner, and John 
     Sweller summarized ``decades of research that ``clearly 
     demonstrates that for almost all students, ``direct, 
     explicit instruction is ``more effective than inquiry-
     based progressive education in math.
       Clark, Kirschner, and Sweller conclude that after ``a half 
     century of progressive educators advocating inquiry-based 
     teaching of math, ``no body of sound research can be found 
     that supports using that approach with ``anyone other than 
     the most expert students. Evidence from the best studies, 
     they emphasize, ``almost uniformly supports ``full and 
     explicit instruction rather than an inquiry-based approach.

       Brian Conrad of Stanfords math department points out that 
     the revised math framework contains much in the way of 
     ``false or misleading descriptions of research on math 
     instruction. It also cites ``unpublished papers with design 
     flaws, instead of relying solely on peer-reviewed published 
     work. Conrad asks: Why does the framework ``still not adhere 
     to the level of

     research quality called for by the What Works 
     Clearinghouse?
       Conrad says that the framework is invoking neuroscience 
     literature ``in misleading ways to promote ``pseudo-
     scientific claims about progressive-education math 
     instruction improving pathways in the brain. The framework 
     wrongly cites a paper to promote the general use of 
     ``invented strategies (that is, students devising their own 
     strategies) as a proven approach to learning standard 
     algorithms.
       Conrad finds that the framework distorts citations in a way 
     that indicates ``an ideological (rather than evidence-based) 
     opposition to acceleration. He points out that ``there is 
     extensive literature with conclusions opposite that cited 
     in the framework, ``but these are barely ever mentioned.
       As Wurman and I have written before:
       State-adopted education programs and recommendations are 
     supposed to be ``research-based. This does not just mean an 
     article or 2 in a peer-reviewed journal. It means there is a 
     consensus or strong evidence of effectiveness in the 
     published research. If no strong evidence exists, a practice 
     should not be broadly recommended. . . .
       If the framework writers had wanted solid evidence, they 
     would have relied on the final report and subgroup reports of 
     the 2008 federal National Mathematics Advisory Panel. They 
     would have made even more use of the federal Institute of 
     Education Sciences practice guides, which are designed for 
     teachers and curriculum writers.

       The revised framework rejects (as did its earlier 
     iterations) the time-honored aim of preparing students to 
     take Algebra I in eighth grade. Eighth-grade algebra is the 
     policy in high-performing foreign countries whose inhabitants 
     will compete with Americas children in the future--and that 
     eighth-grade goal was expressly part of the 1999 and 2006 
     California math frameworks. This current framework recommends 
     ninth grade as when almost all students should take Algebra 
     I.
       Students who plan to go to selective colleges and 
     universities or who plan to major in STEM fields in college 
     need to pass calculus in high school. Taking algebra in 
     eighth grade allows them to do so.
       Education journalist John Fensterwald points out that:
       To discourage widespread enrollment in eighth-grade 
     algebra, the frameworks diagram laying out STEM and non-STEM 
     course pathways omits eighth-grade algebra as an option.
       There are possible (but laborious and bureaucratically 
     troublesome) workarounds for STEM-inclined students, like 
     double-booking math classes in one year. But the system is 
     not friendly to the workarounds, and they are discouraging to 
     students. As Conrad points out, the framework authors (who 
     are ideologically opposed to acceleration) had three years to 
     come up with a way to accommodate those who need to take 
     calculus in high school, but they didnt do it.
       The recent effort in San Francisco Unified to make all 
     students take Algebra I in ninth grade, was, as Conrad points 
     out, ``a total failure, exacerbating the very inequities it 
     aimed to prevent.

      4. Substitution of Weak Data Science for Rigorous Algebra II

       The framework promotes the idea of students taking math-
     lite data science courses instead of Algebra II. Students who 
     take such math-lite courses will be ill-prepared for math and 
     other STEM courses when they get to college.
       In his report on an earlier draft of the math framework, 
     Conrad says of the promotion of these data science classes: 
     ``Whatever author is responsible for such a myopic view of 
     mathematics should never again be involved in the setting of 
     public policy guidance on math education.

       I have previously mentioned the frameworks opposition to 
     acceleration. It also opposes tracking. As Conrad points out, 
     the framework uses ``citation misrepresentations to promote 
     its ``anti-tracking narrative of heterogeneously-grouped 
     classrooms at all levels.
       Homogeneously-grouped classrooms allow teachers to work 
     more effectively without the need to teach students who are 
     at widely different levels. Students can be evaluated on 
     their achievements in different subjects and placed in 
     accelerated classes only in the subjects where they excel. 
     This avoids the misplacements inherent in across-the-board 
     multi-subject tracking. The framework displays an ideological 
     rather than empirical opposition to ability grouping.

       In Chapter 2, the framework pushes teaching methods in math 
     class that emphasize radically egalitarian ``social justice 
     goals. Not only is radical egalitarianism ethically dubious, 
     but math class should be for math, not for political 
     indoctrination.
       For example, the current framework contends that 
     mathematics is to be used to ``both understand and impact the 
     world. It argues that math teachers should hold the 
     political position that ``mathematics plays a role in the 
     power structures and privileges that exist within our society 
     and can support action and positive change.
       Furthermore, according to this official California 
     framework, teachers should use mathematics politically ``to 
     analyze and discuss issues of fairness and justice. In an 
     elementary school classroom, teachers would, for example, 
     have students ``studying counting and comparing to understand 
     fairness in the context of current and historical events.
       The framework recommends the fringy methods of ``trauma-
     informed pedagogy, which encourage students to suggest 
     ``recommendations and taking action. Teachers should also, 
     it says, provide ``curricular examples that provide 
     students with a mathematical toolkit and mindset ``to 
     identify and combat inequities. According to the framework, 
     students are ``to use mathematics to highlight inequities. 
     Then they should learn to use mathematics to transform the 
     world--a rather inappropriate task for math class.

       There are close to 6 million students in California. What 
     is done in California public schools influences practices in 
     the rest of the country. Parents and taxpayers want math to 
     be taught sensibly. Its just a scientific reality that 
     children need to learn math facts and standard algorithms. 
     This current California counterproductive math instructional 
     framework will produce a repeat of the Math Wars of the 1990s 
     or a deeper rebellion against public schools and in favor of 
     parental choice.
I rise today in solidarity with Mr. 
Gajendrakumar Ponnambalam, a member of the Parliament of Sri Lanka. Mr. 
Ponnambalam has recently been subjected to harassment and wrongful 
detention by Sri Lankan law enforcement. Despite video evidence 
contradicting the official account and lack of an official arrest 
warrant, Mr. Ponnambalam was arrested for behaving in an unruly manner 
towards state intelligence officers during a public meeting. 
Fortunately, he was released on bail shortly after his arrest.
  While I am glad to hear of Mr. Ponnambalams release, his harassment 
by Sri Lankan authorities remains highly troubling, and is part of a 
stream of attacks on minority members of the Sri Lankan parliament. Mr. 
Ponnambalam is a member of the minority Tamil ethnic group who has 
advocated for the marginalized and spoken at the United Nations Human 
Rights Council about the killing of Tamil journalists. Other members of 
the Sri Lankan parliament have faced harassment because of their 
activism over the past few months on the destruction of Tamil places of 
worship, militarization in the Northeast, and other crimes against 
members of the Tamil ethnic group.
, we must stand with the victims of human rights 
violations in their advocacy for their rights. I hope my colleagues 
will join me in expressing support for Mr. Ponnambalam and in calling 
for the Sri Lankan government to commit to democratic values and 
practices.
it is my honor to recognize the Erwin 
Township Historical Society and their newly constructed walking trail 
and artifact building in Erwin Heritage Park. Erwin Township Historical 
Society has played an instrumental role in the preservation of Erwins 
culture and history, and Im confident their newest offerings will 
continue to have a lasting impact on residents for years to come.
  Named as the first grant recipient from the Michigan History 
Alliance, the Erwin Township Historical Society has been deservingly 
recognized for their part in protecting and cataloguing Michigans rich 
history. From erecting park benches to the restoration of the East End 
Schoolhouse to become their museum, the Erwin Township Historical 
Society has expanded their reach in the community and has become a 
familiar and trustworthy service for all residents to utilize. We are 
blessed to have organizations of this caliber in Northern Michigan and 
the Upper Peninsula, and I am appreciative of their work and service.
  On July 1, 2023, the Erwin Township Historical Society will celebrate 
the completion and dedication of their new walking trail and artifact 
building in Erwin Heritage Park. I want to thank all involved in the 
Erwin Township Historical Society for making these endeavors possible 
and for facilitating a successful ceremony.
, it is my honor to recognize the Erwin Township 
Historical Society for their work to preserve the history and culture 
of their community. On behalf of Michigans First District, I wish the 
historical society and their supporters the best in their future 
endeavors.
I rise today to recognize the 
contributions of a scholarly article recently published by the Jewish 
Review of Books, titled ``When Freedom Began to Ring. Authored by 
Paul Finkelman and South-Eastern Pennsylvanian Lance J. Sussman, this 
article explores how the patriotism of Jews during the American 
Revolution contributed to political equality and a national policy of 
religious liberty in the newly formed nation. Religious liberty is a 
critical component to our identity as Americans and this research 
highlights the important contributions of Jews in shaping this culture 
of religious tolerance in our Republic. I include in the Record the 
full article by Paul Finkelman and Lance J. Sussman.

       In his famous 1790 letter to the Jewish community of 
     Newport, Rhode Island, George Washington wrote that ``the 
     Government of the United States, which gives to bigotry no 
     sanction, to persecution no assistance, requires only that 
     they who live under its protection should demean themselves 
     as good citizens, in giving it on all occasions their 
     effectual support. These words were not the kind of quid 
     pro quo sometimes offered by European Enlightenment leaders 
     of the time to Jews; it was not an implicit warning that they 
     ought to behave themselves if they wanted to be tolerated.
       President Washington, under whose leadership many Jews had 
     fought during the Revolutionary War, was simply recognizing 
     that America only required of its Jews what it required of 
     all its citizens. At the founding, America was already not a 
     Christian nation, and this was in large part because of its 
     Jews.
       Everywhere else in the world, prior to the American 
     Revolution, Jews were disfranchised, politically isolated, 
     and vulnerable. Even where they were relatively secure, such 
     as in England, they were not full citizens. In 1775, on the 
     eve of the Revolutionary War, English Jews could not vote, 
     serve on juries, serve in Parliament, be military officers, 
     attend a university, engage in some businesses, become 
     barristers, or practice some other professions. Jewish 
     immigrants had to pay special ``alien taxes forever, 
     because they could not naturalize. And as aliens, immigrant 
     Jews were prohibited from owning real estate or seagoing 
     vessels, and from engaging in colonial or foreign trade.
       Things had been somewhat better in Englands North American 
     colonies, where momentum toward full equality built as the 
     Revolution grew nearer, in part because of Jewish support for 
     the patriot cause. In 1765, ten Jewish merchants in New York 
     City, along with nearly two hundred Christian businessmen, 
     signed a non-importation agreement to boycott British goods. 
     Jewish merchants in Philadelphia and Newport, signed similar 
     agreements. Others, most famously Haym Salomon, joined the 
     Sons of Liberty. Gershom Mendes Seixas, the spiritual leader 
     of New Yorks Shearith Israel--the first synagogue in what 
     became the United States--actively supported Independence. In 
     1774, Francis Salvador had won a

     seat in South Carolinas Provincial Congress. He was 
     reelected in 1776, thus becoming the first Jewish elected 
     public official in the new United States. He served until he 
     was killed in battle that August.
       Most Jews in New York, Philadelphia, Newport, Charleston, 
     and Savannah--where the Revolution was brewing--joined the 
     cause early. In doing so, they staked their claim to 
     political equality as a right, not a set of privileges to be 
     granted.
       As they did nowhere in Europe, Jews served as officers in 
     the patriot armies. Mordecai Sheftall, a Savannah 
     businessman, was a full colonel, then the third highest rank 
     in the American army. David Salisbury Franks rose to the rank 
     of Lieutenant Colonel, served as a diplomat to France and 
     Morocco during the war, and later became the assistant 
     cashier of the Bank of the United States. Solomon Bush, whose 
     father had signed a non-importation agreement, ended the war 
     as a Lieutenant Colonel and the deputy adjutant-general of 
     the Pennsylvania militia. His younger brother, Captain Lewis 
     Bush, died in combat. There were no Jewish officers in the 
     British army or among the Hessian mercenaries during the 
     Revolutionary War. (However, Alexander Zuntz, a Hessian 
     civilian commissary, served as the Hazzan of Shearith Israel 
     congregation while the British occupied New York City. 
     Impressed with American religious liberty, he stayed in New 
     York after the war, and eventually became president of the 
     synagogue.)
       In the independent United States, every new state 
     constitution granted Jews the right to vote, though nine of 
     the first eleven of them originally limited office holding to 
     Protestants or Christians. A few states retained established 
     churches or special state benefits for some faiths. Religious 
     tests for office directly denied Jews full political 
     equality. These state establishments did not deny Jews 
     religious liberty or legal rights, but they made them (and 
     members of other non-favored faiths) less than equal 
     citizens. This situation, however, was not destined to last 
     very long.
       When Pennsylvanias 1776 constitution, for instance, 
     required state legislators to ``acknowledge the Scriptures of 
     the Old and New Testament to be given by Divine 
     inspiration, the states Jews protested. Members of 
     Philadelphias Congregation Mikveh Israel studied and 
     annotated all state constitutions, noting where Jews faced 
     discrimination, and then published letters in newspapers 
     calling attention to the new constitutions objectionable 
     features. In late 1783, Philadelphias Jewish leaders 
     petitioned the Pennsylvania government to allow Jews to hold 
     public office. Seven years later, Pennsylvanias new 
     constitution removed the religious test for office holding.
       In 1787 Congress, operating under the Articles of 
     Confederation, passed the Northwest Ordinance, the forerunner 
     of subsequent laws regulating the settlement of western 
     territories and the creation of new states. The Ordinance 
     provided for ``extending the fundamental principles of civil 
     and religious liberty in the national territories. Written 
     before the Constitution, this was the first national 
     guarantee of religious freedom. The Confederation Congress, 
     which included no Jews and only the occasional Catholic, 
     could have easily established some kind of non-denominational 
     Protestantism or Christianity. But it did no such thing.
       In that same year, on behalf of Congregation Mikveh Israel, 
     Revolutionary War veteran Jonas Phillips wrote to George 
     Washington, who was then serving as the presiding officer of 
     the Constitutional Convention, requesting the Convention 
     protect Jewish political rights. As it turned out, the 
     Convention had already agreed to prohibit religious tests for 
     office holding, but the willingness of Philadelphia Jews to 
     lobby for their rights further illustrates American Jewrys 
     newfound boldness.
       On July 4, 1788, Philadelphia held a parade to celebrate 
     the ratification of the new constitution. The Grand Federal 
     Procession was led by an interfaith group of clergymen, 
     including a rabbi, their arms interlocked. Later, when George 
     Washington took the first presidential oath of office in New 
     York City, Hazzan Gershom Mendes Seixas joined other clergy 
     from the city as a witness.
       The First Amendment, ratified in 1791, confirmed the right 
     of religious free exercise for all Americans and guaranteed 
     separation of church and state. Under the Constitution, Jews 
     held federal offices, even where they could not hold offices 
     under existing state constitutions. Thus, in 1801 President 
     Thomas Jefferson appointed Reuben Etting to be the US marshal 
     in Maryland, even though he would not have been allowed to 
     hold any office under that states constitution until 1826. 
     Joel Hart and Mordecai Manuel Noah served as diplomats under 
     Jefferson and Madison. Noah was later the sheriff of New York 
     City, the ``boss of Tammany Hall, and a local judge.
       The Constitution did not preclude individual states from 
     barring Jews from public office. Maryland, Massachusetts, and 
     New Jersey repealed these rules before the Civil War, while 
     North Carolina did so during Reconstruction. New Hampshire 
     finally abolished the practice in 1877. Nor could the 
     constitutional expansion of Jewish rights end social 
     antisemitism. Antisemitism, rooted in Christian theology, 
     nationalisms, bigotry, private fears and ignorance, and the 
     rantings of demagogues and conspiracy theorists, will, of 
     course, never be abolished by government decree. A political 
     system can regulate behavior and even promote tolerance, but 
     cannot end private intolerance and hatred. In the Old World, 
     however, anti-Jewish prejudice was often encouraged, 
     supported, or even mandated, by governments. In America, from 
     the outset, the law was on the Jews side.
       Furthermore, Americas unprecedented acceptance of the Jews 
     helped to induce other western nations, including 
     Revolutionary France and mid-nineteenth-century Great 
     Britain, to grant Jews similar rights, although the process 
     in both countries was piecemeal, halting, and incomplete for 
     many years. In Britain, for example, Lionel Rothschild won 
     multiple elections to Parliament starting in 1847 but was 
     unable to take his seat until 1859, after the Jews Relief Act 
     had been passed. Full Jewish political equality in Britain 
     was not achieved until 1871.
       As we approach the 250th anniversary of the American 
     Revolution, on July 4, 2026, it is important to recall how 
     the patriotism of Jews led to their political equality and a 
     national policy of religious liberty. The United States 
     became the first western nation to prohibit any religious 
     test for national public office, have no national or official 
     faith, have no laws restricting Jewish secular life or 
     religious observance, and allow for freedom of worship and 
     belief on a broad national scale.
       When George Washington wrote to the Newport Jewish 
     community, this process was not yet complete, but the 
     holdouts were few and relatively insignificant. The 
     Revolutionary era set the stage for the ensuing two and a 
     half centuries of Jewish flourishing in a country where, to 
     return again to the words of Washingtons historic letter. 
     minorities enjoy religious freedom not because mere tolerance 
     has been extended to them but because ``all possess alike 
     liberty of conscience and immunities of citizenship.
Title IV of Senate Resolution 4, agreed to by the Senate of February 
4, 1977, calls for establishment of a system for a computerized 
schedule of all meetings and hearings of Senate committees, 
subcommittees, joint committees, and committees of conference. This 
title requires all such committees to notify the Office of the Senate 
Daily Digest--designated by the Rules Committee--of the time, place and 
purpose of the meetings, when scheduled and any cancellations or 
changes in the meetings as they occur.
  As an additional procedure along with the computerization of this 
information, the Office of the Senate Daily Digest will prepare this 
information for printing in the Extensions of Remarks section of the 
Congressional Record on Monday and Wednesday of each week.
  Meetings scheduled for Thursday, July 13, 2023 may be found in the 
Daily Digest of todays Record.

     1 p.m.
       Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe
         To hold hearings to examine Russias alpine assets, 
           focusing on money laundering and sanctions evasion in 
           Switzerland.
                                                            SD-G50

                                JULY 19
     9:30 a.m.
       Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
         Business meeting to consider S. 1253, to increase the 
           number of U.S. Customs and Border Protection Customs 
           and Border Protection officers and support staff and to 
           require reports that identify staffing, infrastructure, 
           and equipment needed to enhance security at ports of 
           entry, S. 1444, to increase the pay and enhance the 
           training of United States Border Patrol agents, S. 
           2251, to improve the cybersecurity of the Federal 
           Government, S. 2248, to require a pilot program on the 
           use of big data analytics to identify vessels evading 
           sanctions and export controls and to require a report 
           on the availability in the United States of emerging 
           and foundational technologies subject to export 
           controls, S. 1332, to require the Office of Management 
           and Budget to revise the Standard Occupational 
           Classification system to establish a separate code for 
           direct support professionals, S. 1524, to ensure that 
           whistleblowers, including contractors, are protected 
           from retaliation when a Federal employee orders a 
           reprisal, S. 2032, to require the reduction of the 
           reliance and expenditures of the Federal Government on 
           legacy information technology systems, S. 1973, to 
           require the purchase of domestically made flags of the 
           United States of America for use by the Federal 
           Government, an original bill entitled, ``Northern 
           Border Coordination Act, an original bill entitled, 
           ``Mitigating Foreign Influence in Classified Government 
           Contracts Act, an original bill entitled, ``Border 
           Enforcement, Security, and Trade Facilitation Act, an 
           original bill entitled, ``Wildland Firefighter Paycheck 
           Protection Act, an original bill entitled, ``PUMP 
           Technical Corrections Act, an original bill entitled, 
           ``Purchased Data Inventory Act, an original bill 
           entitled, ``Streamlining Federal Grants Act, an 
           original bill entitled, ``PFAS-Free Procurement Act, 
           an original bill entitled, ``Government Ethics 
           Transparency Act, an original bill entitled, ``AI 
           Leadership To Enable Accountable Deployment Act, an 
           original bill entitled, ``Eliminate Useless Reports 
           Act, an original bill entitled, ``Federal 
           Cybersecurity Workforce Expansion Act, an original 
           bill entitled, ``Grant Transparency Act, and the 
           nomination of Fara Damelin, of Virginia, to be 
           Inspector General, Federal Communications Commission.
                                                            SD-562
     2 p.m.
       Joint Economic Committee
         To hold hearings to examine the economic impact of 
           diabetes.
                                                          CHOB-210
     2:30 p.m.
       Committee on Energy and Natural Resources
       Subcommittee on Water and Power
         To hold hearings to examine S. 461, to make certain 
           irrigation districts eligible for Pick-Sloan Missouri 
           Basin Program pumping power, S. 482, to amend the 
           Klamath Basin Water Supply Enhancement Act of 2000 to 
           provide the Secretary of the Interior with certain 
           authorities with respect to projects affecting the 
           Klamath Basin watershed, S. 739, to clarify 
           jurisdiction with respect to certain Bureau of 
           Reclamation pumped storage development, S. 1118, to 
           establish the Open Access Evapotranspiration (OpenET) 
           Data Program, S. 1215, to require assessments of 
           opportunities to install and maintain floating 
           photovoltaic solar panels at Bureau of Reclamation and 
           Corps of Engineers projects, S. 1521, to amend the 
           Federal Power Act to modernize and improve the 
           licensing of non-Federal hydropower projects, S. 1662, 
           to direct the Secretary of the Interior to convey to 
           the Midvale Irrigation District the Pilot Butte Power 
           Plant in the State of Wyoming, S. 1955, to amend the 
           Central Utah Project Completion Act to authorize 
           expenditures for the conduct of certain water 
           conservation measures in the Great Salt Lake basin, S. 
           2102, to provide for drought preparedness and improved 
           water supply reliability, S. 2160, to amend the Omnibus 
           Public Land Management Act of 2009 to authorize certain 
           extraordinary operation and maintenance work for urban 
           canals of concern, S. 2161, to provide financial 
           assistance for projects to address certain subsidence 
           impacts in the State of California, S. 2162, to support 
           water infrastructure in Reclamation States, S.

           2166, to amend the Reclamation States Emergency Drought 
           Relief Act of 1991 and the Omnibus Public Land 
           Management Act of 2009 to provide grants to States and 
           Indian Tribes for programs to voluntarily repurpose 
           agricultural land to reduce consumptive water use, S. 
           2169, to authorize the Secretary of the Interior to 
           carry out watershed pilots, S. 2202, to amend the 
           Omnibus Public Land Management Act of 2009 to authorize 
           the modification of transferred works to increase 
           public benefits and other project benefits as part of 
           extraordinary operation and maintenance work, and an 
           original bill to authorize the Secretary of the 
           Interior to continue to implement endangered fish 
           recovery programs from the Upper Colorado and San Juan 
           River Basins.
                                                            SD-366
       Committee on Indian Affairs
         To hold hearings to examine S. 2088, to direct the 
           Secretary of the Interior to complete all actions 
           necessary for certain land to be held in restricted fee 
           status by the Oglala Sioux Tribe and Cheyenne River 
           Sioux Tribe.
                                                            SD-628
     2:45 p.m.
       Committee on Appropriations
       Subcommittee on Financial Services and General Government
         To hold hearings to examine the FY 2024 budget for the 
           Securities and Exchange Commission.
                                                            SD-124
       Committee on the Judiciary
       Subcommittee on Competition Policy, Antitrust, and Consumer 
           Rights
         To hold hearings to examine trends in vertical merger 
           enforcement.
                                                            SD-226
     3 p.m.
       Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry
       Subcommittee on Rural Development and Energy
         To hold hearings to examine rural water, focusing on 
           modernizing our community water systems.
                                                           SR-328A
       Committee on Small Business and Entrepreneurship
         Business meeting to consider S. 38, to amend the Small 
           Business Act to codify the Boots to Business Program, 
           S. 77, to reauthorize the State Trade Expansion Program 
           of the Small Business Administration, S. 609, to 
           establish a pilot program awarding competitive grants 
           to organizations administering entrepreneurial 
           development programming to formerly incarcerated 
           individuals, and other purposes, S. 673, to allow 
           nonprofit child care providers to participate in 
           certain loan programs of the Small Business 
           Administration, S. 936, to amend the Small Business Act 
           to include requirements relating to graduates of career 
           and technical education programs or programs of study 
           for small business development centers and womens 
           business centers, S. 943, to increase the minimum 
           disaster loan amount for which the Small Business 
           Administration may require collateral, S. 1156, to 
           establish an Office of Native American Affairs within 
           the Small Business Administration, S. 1345, to amend 
           the Small Business Act to enhance the Office of Credit 
           Risk Management, to require the Administrator of the 
           Small Business Administration to issue rules relating 
           to environmental obligations of certified development 
           companies, S. 1352, to amend the Small Business 
           Investment Act of 1958 to improve the loan guaranty 
           program, enhance the ability of small manufacturers to 
           access affordable capital, S. 1370, to reauthorize and 
           limit the pre-disaster mitigation program of the Small 
           Business Administration, S. 1396, to improve 
           commercialization activities in the SBIR and STTR 
           programs, S. 1402, to require the Administrator of the 
           Small Business Administration, in consultation with the 
           Under Secretary of Commerce for Minority Business 
           Development, to establish a grant program to create or 
           expand programs at minority-serving institutions and 
           historically Black colleges and universities that 
           promote minority business ownership and 
           entrepreneurship, S. 1458, to require the Administrator 
           of the Small Business Administration to establish a 
           program to assist small business concerns with 
           purchasing cybersecurity products and services, S. 
           1739, to require the Administrator of the Small 
           Business Administration to establish an Innovation 
           Voucher Grant Program, S. 1763, to include smoke in the 
           definition of disaster in the Small Business Act, S. 
           2094, to reauthorize the Interagency Committee on 
           Womens Business Enterprise, S. 2099, to establish an 
           Office of Community Financial Institutions within the 
           Small Business Administration that will strengthen the 
           ability of Community Financial Institutions to support 
           the development of small business concerns in 
           underserved communities, S. 2100, to amend the Small 
           Business Investment Act of 1958 to modify fees and 
           funding for certain small business refinancing loans 
           and loans to qualified State or local development 
           companies, S. 2146, to amend the Small Business Act to 
           increase the Governmentwide goal for participation in 
           Federal contracts by small business concerns owned and 
           controlled by service-disabled veterans, S. 2184, to 
           amend the Small Business Act to improve the Womens 
           Business Center Program, S. 2185, to amend the Small 
           Business Act to require an annual report on 
           entrepreneurial development programs, S. 2206, to 
           increase the guarantee amount under the Surety Bond 
           Program of the Small Business Administration, S. 2209, 
           to establish a veteran Federal procurement 
           entrepreneurship training program, S. 2212, to require 
           the Administrator of the Small Business Administration 
           to establish an SBIC Advisory Committee, and an 
           original bill entitled, ``Community Advantage Loan 
           Program Act.
                                                           SR-428A

                                JULY 20
     9:30 a.m.
       Committee on Environment and Public Works
         To hold hearings to examine the Water Resources 
           Development Act, focusing on non-Federal stakeholder 
           views.
                                                            SD-406
     10 a.m.
       Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
         To hold hearings to examine Americas supply chain 
           security, focusing on understanding and mitigating 
           threats.
                                                            SD-562

                                JULY 26
     10 a.m.
       Committee on Environment and Public Works
         To hold hearings to examine improving capacity for 
           critical mineral recovery through electronic waste 
           recycling and reuse.
                                                            SD-406

     2:30 p.m.
       Committee on Environment and Public Works
       Subcommittee on Clean Air, Climate, and Nuclear Safety
         To hold hearings to examine cleaner trains, focusing on 
           opportunities for reducing emissions from Americas 
           rail network.
                                                            SD-406
I rise today to honor Dr. Javier M. 
Sanchez as he completes his term as the 130th President of the San 
Bernardino County Medical Society. He began this leadership position 
representing over 1,700 physicians on June 22, 2022. Dr. Sanchez is a 
family medicine physician partner of the Southern California Permanente 
Medical Group practicing at their Redlands medical offices. He received 
his medical degree from the University of lowa Roy J. &amp; Lucille A. 
Carver College of Medicine in 1996 and completed his residency in 
family medicine.
  Dr. Sanchez has been focused on addressing disparities in medicine 
and helped develop the Southern California Kaiser Permanente Language 
Concordance Program which helps match those with limited English 
proficiency with physicians who are fluent in their first language. He 
has been a Clinical Professor of family Medicine at the Keck School of 
Medicine and is currently an Associate Professor of Family Medicine at 
the University of California Riverside School of Medicine. I commend 
Dr. Sanchez for his service as President of the San Bernardino County 
Medical Society and remain thankful for the work of all of our medical 
professionals in Californias 23rd District and across the country.