I include in the Record the following speech 
I gave commemorating the 20th anniversary of The World War II Memorial 
on the National Mall.

       It is a great privilege to introduce our next speaker whose 
     persistence ensured this memorial took its place on the 
     National Mall 20 years ago. Her commitment to this Memorial 
     and the Greatest Generation is unparalleled. The longest 
     serving woman in Congressional history, Congresswoman Marcy 
     Kaptur. In 2014, Ambassador Williams called Congresswoman 
     Kaptur, the mother of the World War II Memorial for her 
     critical role in moving legislation through Congress and her 
     devotion to World War II veterans.
       Congresswoman Kaptur continues to support the Memorial, 
     recently leading efforts for the United States Mints 2024 
     Greatest Generation Commemorative Coin program to help fund 
     Memorials, maintenance and educational programs. It is my 
     great honor to introduce the mother of the World War II 
     Memorial: Congresswoman Marcy Kaptur.

       Good Morning. As I was listening to the beautiful music, I 
     was reminded of one of my constituents whose name was John 
     Szymanski, used to look out over a crowd like this and say, 
     ``You look just beautiful. And you do.
       Dear Americans and guests, respectfully, on this Memorial 
     Day of 2024, we gather here in our nations Capital at our 
     National World War II Memorial centered along Americas Mall 
     of Democracy. Today, 235 years after the founding of our 
     young Republic, we honor the memory of all Americans who are 
     war dead, including unknown soldiers who rendered their dear 
     lives in military service to Liberty. Our Republics sacred 
     historical journey of Liberty, Justice, and Equality for all 
     rests on their strong shoulders of over 1,100,000 of our 
     forebears in arms. They were our loved ones, our 
     grandparents, our parents, our uncles, aunts, neighbors, 
     friends. They lodged deeply in our minds and our hearts 
     forever.
       Soldiers, Sailors, Airmen, Space Force, Marines, Guard and 
     Reserves, Coast Guard, Merchant Marines. We must honor their 
     memory and meaning as we are today. Thank you all for coming. 
     We recognize those who fought in the Revolutionary War, the 
     War of 1812, the Mexican-American War, the Civil War, the 
     Spanish-American War, World War I, World War II, the Korean 
     Conflict, the Vietnam War, the Persian Gulf War, the Iraq and 
     Afghanistan Wars, and here today, America remembers Pearl 
     Harbor, the May 8th Victory Europe, the September 2nd Victory 
     Pacific, Guadalcanal, Midway, Anzio, D-Day, Omaha Beach, 
     Saipan, Battle of the Bulge, and Iwo Jima, to name a few.
       Today, America bows to these heroes and heroines. They did 
     not seek a Memorial Day. Originally known as Decoration Day, 
     following the Civil War. It was widely observed starting on 
     May 30th, 1868. In 1968, Memorial Day was authorized by 
     Congress to designate the last Monday in May as the day of 
     tribute and remembrance of those who died while serving in 
     our armed forces.
       Today at this place, we recall a more recent chapter of 
     Americas solemn history. The World War II Memorial was built 
     to honor the human sacrifice that defines the 20th centurys 
     profound achievement: the victory of Liberty over tyranny. 
     After Imperialist Japan bombed Pearl Harbor on December 7th, 
     1941, the United States declared war on Japan and its allies, 
     Germany and Italy. In the immortal words of the Great 
     American General, George Marshall, quote, ``Before the sun 
     sets, our flag will be recognized throughout the world as a 
     symbol of freedom and of overwhelming force. More than 
     400,000 service members died in service to Liberty halfway 
     around the world on three fronts, Europe, the Pacific, North 
     Africa. And over the past two decades, more than 80 million 
     visitors have traveled to pay homage at this Memorial to 
     them. The visitors make the journey to honor the 
     extraordinary valor and historic achievements by our 
     forebears who bequeath Liberty to us.
       This gathering place is designed as a vista for reflection, 
     between the Washington Monument to the East that honors our 
     nations founding and General George Washington, our nations 
     first President. To our west rests the Lincoln Memorial and 
     whose spectacular plaza honors President Abraham Lincoln. 
     During the 19th Century, his heroic life-giving leadership 
     preserved the American Union, following our nations bitter 
     civil war, upwards of 700,000 soldiers and civilians died, 
     along with unknown numbers of civilians on our own territory. 
     The United States of America was victorious, but the price 
     paid in battle of brother against brother, state against 
     state made the Civil War the costliest war in lives lost of 
     any of Americas wars. America will not go back.
       The sacrificial patriots honored here are the awful price 
     of taming the 20th centurys vicious beasts of human 
     annihilation. President Eisenhower described the fighting as 
     ``savagery Our valorous heroes who survived the wars 
     against Nazism in Europe and North Africa, the Holocaust, and 
     Imperialism in the Pacific, then returned home. Recently, as 
     I witnessed the address of Japans Prime Minister Fumio 
     Kishida, before the assembled Congress of the United States 
     this year, my memory recalled the 79 years of history 
     extraordinary that made that moment and what had been 
     required. America had built and rebuilt a war-torn world, and 
     though it was not until President Truman integrated the US 
     military post-World War in 1948 that America proclaimed, as 
     did Lincoln, that Liberty has no color. History records how 
     African American foot soldiers and Tuskegee airmen fought 
     hand in hand with enlistees not of color, but veterans all 
     returned home, built their families, and communities. They 
     intentionally created global institutions to promote dialogue 
     and understanding, as well as to defend our Free World. They 
     did not assume these tasks willingly, but of necessity. They 
     did not shirk

     their responsibility to the future. They aspired to a higher 
     purpose to tame the demons of war.
       The World War II Memorial is not named for a person, but 
     for the 20th centurys Greatest Generation. Here at this 
     Memorial, 4,006 gold stars on the Wall of Heroes represent 
     those 400,600 fallen Americans who offered their precious 
     lives to Liberty. Learning from the grit of World War II, 
     Americas team who built this memorial never gave up. Former 
     Chairman, as has been mentioned of the Battle Monuments 
     Commission, Ambassador Haydn Williams never gave up. He would 
     write of these patriots, and I quote, ``If their silent stare 
     could speak, Archibald MacLeish would have them say, `we 
     leave you our deaths, give them meaning  Those that 
     survived did just that.
       They forged new alliances like NATO to defend our Free 
     World. And they shaped a world in which the United States 
     entered its longest period in history of relative peace 
     between great powers. That architecture is being tested this 
     very day.
       The World War II generation triumphed over adversity. It 
     vanquished the hateful cruelty exacted by the Axes of Nazi, 
     Imperialists, and ultimately hateful cruelty in 1989 and 
     1991, with Soviet dictators who savagely had killed and 
     starved millions upon millions upon millions more innocent 
     human beings than ever before on Earth.
       This coming June 6th, our nation will commemorate the 80th 
     anniversary of the D-Day landing of 1944, the turning point 
     in World War II. History notes, it was the largest military 
     and naval operation ever conducted by any armed force in the 
     history of the world. 400,000 US combat troops were led by 
     brilliant US Army General Omar Bradley. US troops and 2,000 
     paratroopers joined with Britain, and Canadian allies in a 
     total force numbering 1,200,000, in Operation Overlord, in a 
     surprise attack that that enormous force traversed the 
     English Channel beginning on D-Day on June 6th, 1944. Their 
     mission was to defeat the deadly forces of Nazi tyranny that 
     had invaded France and other European nations that adjoined. 
     What transpired was the most harrowing, costliest battle in 
     world history. Enemy planes bombed our valiant seaborne 
     troops as Nazi platoons hidden in bunker nests arrayed across 
     the high bluffs above the French coast, shot down as Allied 
     troops in column after column after column scaled up the 
     treacherous cliffs. The English Channel turned red with the 
     precious blood of our fallen.
       Our own Uncle, Stanley Rogowski, from Toledo, Ohio, was one 
     of them. Forced to crawl over layers of corpses of his dead 
     comrades as he and his army engineer buddies hauled heavy 
     steel track up the embankment under heavy fire. Their valor 
     allowed tons and tons of equipment to be hauled on that 
     track. Tanks and ammunition. And ultimately the Allies kept 
     persevering forward. Over the next two months would come the 
     terrible battle of Saint Lo. There, Americas soldiers under 
     command of Army General George Patton would break the back of 
     Nazi invaders as fierce fighting in the treacherous 
     French hedgerows resulted in terrible losses. The Allies, 
     U.S., British, and Canadian would slowly gain ground month 
     after agonizing month of fighting. They continued to aim 
     at the heart of the strategic edge of Nazi resistance in 
     Germany itself.
       Still fighting a year later, on March 7th, 1945, it would 
     be an exceptional soldier from Holland, Ohio, Sergeant 
     Alexander Drabik, who would lead the consequential spearhead 
     charge for American forces with the 27th Armed Infantry 
     Brigade of the 9th Armored Division. Under intense enemy 
     fire, they dashed eastward across the Ludendorff Bridge over 
     the Rhine River near Remagen and toward the heart of Nazi 
     Germany. Polish conscripts had cut the fuses that the Nazis 
     had planted to blow up the bridge. It was the last bridge 
     that the Nazis had not blown up to prevent Allies from 
     crossing into the heart of German territory. Sergeant 
     Drabiks bravery allowed troops to cross over within an hour. 
     The first Allied Brigade across the Rhine River, led by 
     Sergeant Drabik under the command of General John Leonard, 
     also of Toledo, Ohio, would go on to be awarded the 
     Distinguished Service Cross for his extraordinary heroism, 
     and that moment has been deemed the turning point for World 
     War II on the continent of Europe.
       They not only won the war but having faced the abyss of 
     human annihilation. They went on to build the institutions 
     for the architecture of a Free World.
       In 1987, almost a half century after Allied victory in 
     World War II, it was a U.S. Army veteran who had served at 
     Saint Lo, France in Tank Command, who first approached his 
     Congresswoman. His name was Roger Durbin of Berkey, Ohio, 
     located in Lucas Countys 9th Congressional District, and 
     inquired of her in an open forum like this, why was there no 
     World War II in Washington, DC, to which he could bring his 
     grandchildren? That question inspired our 17 year-long shared 
     quest to build this Memorial. May I recognize one of Roger 
     Durbins grandchildren joining us here today, Melissa Durbin 
     Tsuji and her husband, Dr. Jun Tsuji from Berkey, Ohio. Thank 
     you for coming.
       With 24 public hearings heard over 17 years, legislation to 
     build this Memorial was first introduced in the U.S. House in 
     1987 until the memorial was officially dedicated in 2004. The 
     efforts span the terms of three Presidents and eight 
     Congresses. As one sage name, Congressman Barney Frank of 
     Massachusetts quipped, ``it took longer to construct the 
     Memorial than to conduct the war.
       The extraordinary and generous effort to raise private 
     funds to help construct this memorial was led by Frederick W. 
     Smith, CEO of Federal Express. We were all blessed by the 
     fervent support of then retired U.S. Senator and wounded 
     World War II hero, Senator Robert Dole. He dedicated his last 
     years to greeting veterans here almost every day on site and 
     doing everything within his power to help the Memorial reach 
     its full potential. It was heart rending to watch him greet 
     his comrades here. One by one for many, and indeed for him, 
     it would be their last call. Additionally, Senator John Glenn 
     of Ohio, Senator Strom Thurmond of South Carolina, 
     Congressman William Clay of Missouri, Congressman Sonny 
     Montgomery of Mississippi, Congressman Jack Davis of Illinois 
     were essential, and I extend my gratitude, and the gratitude 
     of a nation for their patriotism and bipartisan support to 
     accomplish something great for America.
       And let me shout out a huge thank you to Holly Rotondi, the 
     persevering Executive Director of the Friends of the National 
     World War II Memorial. Where is Holly? There she is. Yay 
     Holly! Your entire Friends Board, led by Jane Droppa, worked 
     tirelessly to support this Memorial and to advance its 
     historical interpretation, and it has touched the hearts and 
     lives of tens of millions of our fellow citizens. You have 
     spread the wings of Liberty for countless people to witness, 
     and your unique, and ever-growing educational program is 
     bringing more interpretation, and historical remembrance to 
     our nation, and world, including the lesson of patriotic 
     self-giving that encapsulates the World War II Generation.
       While our efforts when our efforts began, we could not have 
     imagined the citizen driven initiative that has selflessly 
     helped over 200,000 veterans visit this Memorial, the Honor 
     Flight Program. Honor Flight was co-founded by Ohioan Earl 
     Morse, a physician assistant and retired Air Force Captain, 
     and Jeff Miller, a small business owner and son of a World 
     War II veteran. Morse worked in a Department of Veterans 
     Affairs clinic in Springfield, Ohio, and there he saw many 
     patients who were World War II veterans. After the National 
     World War II Memorial in Washington was completed in 2004, he 
     asked many of his veteran patients if they were going to see 
     it and most said, oh yes. Morse said, ``I would see my World 
     War II veterans, maybe three, six months later, and Id ask 
     them if theyd gone to see it. 300 of them Id seen, and not 
     a one had come to see the Memorial. Reality set in. They were 
     never going ``So, Mr. Morse then offered to personally fly 
     the first two veterans to Washington to see the Memorial, 
     after seeing them break down and cry upon visiting, he 
     pitched his idea to a club of 300 private pilots at a local 
     Air Force base, proposing that the pilots would pay for the 
     flights for the veterans to Washington and personally escort 
     them around the city. 11 volunteered, and history was made as 
     that network was formed.
       Fast forward 20 years, Im proud to say that the Honor 
     Flight program is a resounding success. It is now allowed 
     veterans of any war to witness at no cost the national 
     memorials marking their historic deeds. And I recently 
     welcomed back an Honor Flight from our region of the Midwest, 
     led by a 102-year-old wheelchair bound World War II veteran 
     nurse named Gerri DeMeo. I was overjoyed to hear her response 
     as they took her wheelchair off the plane and moved her into 
     the room and the crowds were cheering and I had the 
     opportunity to ask her, ``Gerri, what did you think of the 
     Memorial? ``Absolutely beautiful Beautiful. And she just 
     beamed. She just beamed.
       Most recently it has been the highest honor and privilege 
     to introduce and gain passage of our new bipartisan 
     legislation, H.R. 1057, the National World War II Memorial 
     Commemorative Coin Act.
       This legislation has authorized the minting of three new 
     coins at the U.S. Treasury in commemoration of today, the 
     20th Anniversary of the National World War II Memorial here 
     in Washington. These coins will serve as an important token 
     of the spirit, sacrifice, and commitment of the brave 
     Americans who fought for the triumph of Liberty.
       The three distinct coins are now on sale through the U.S. 
     Mint for the duration of this year. The net proceeds 
     generated from the sale of these coins will ensure the 
     Memorial is properly maintained for years to come. My hope is 
     that improvements will include expanded educational and 
     historical materials in collaboration with the American 
     battle monuments Commission and the World War II Veterans 
     History Project at the Library of Congress many years ago, 
     championed by Congressman Ron Kind of Wisconsin, now retired. 
     Additionally, with the advance of the Internet, Im 
     challenging each of you to share the information about the 
     coins and think about friends you know, let them know the 
     coins are on sale. With what we have now, with new social 
     media apps, teaching opportunities, and commemorative 
     programing for the millions of people who visit each year and 
     others throughout our country who cannot come can really be 
     advanced through the new electronic capabilities and embrace 
     people across the country.
       Let me just say, while the Greatest Generation saved the 
     world from Nazi and Imperial domination and achieved the 
     collapse of Soviet tyranny, beginning with Poland in 1989, 
     and then all of Central Europe in 1991,

     specters of the 20th century remain. Historian and author of 
     Bloodlands Timothy Snyder urges us, ``It is now up to us to 
     preserve everything that the Greatest Generation fought and 
     died for.
       In my own judgment, eternal vigilance demands attention to 
     strengthen our NATO alliance and allowing Ukraine to accede 
     to the constellation of free nations of Europe. Meeting 
     global strategic imperatives requires requisite weapons 
     systems, naval, satellite, and air supremacy being tested 
     every day by those who would do us harm. Liberty requires 
     accelerating our nations quest for energy independence in 
     perpetuity. Ladies and gentlemen, let us remember the words 
     of Franklin D Roosevelt, who spoke on February 12th, 1943. 
     ``We have faith that future generations will know here, in 
     the middle of the twentieth century, there came a time when 
     men of good will found a way to unite, and produce, and fight 
     to destroy the forces of ignorance, and intolerance, and 
     slavery, and war.
       May God bless those we honor here and their families. May 
     blessings flow to those serving in posts at home and 
     overseas. May everyone gathered here today draw strength from 
     the words and works of the heroes and heroines of the 
     Greatest Generation. And may God bless the United States of 
     America. Thank you.

       The Friends of the National World War II Memorial annually 
     presents the Brigadier General Charles E. McGee Unity Award 
     to individuals or groups that exemplify the spirit of unity 
     and shared values prevalent during World War II. Named after 
     Brigadier General Charles Magee, an original Tuskegee Airman, 
     this award honors those who actively work for community 
     betterment and embody the moral integrity of General McGee 
     and the Greatest Generation. Were proud to present the 
     fourth annual Brigadier General Charles E. McGee Unity Award 
     to Congresswoman Marcy Kaptur. Representing Ohios 9th 
     District since 1983, Congresswoman Kaptur has dedicated her 
     career to promoting unity and cooperation, focusing on 
     economic development, veterans affairs, and environmental 
     conservation.
       In 1987, Congresswoman Kaptur recognized the need for a 
     national tribute to World War II veterans and introduced 
     legislation to create a Memorial. Her persistent advocacy led 
     to the passage of the World War II Memorial Act in 1993. 
     Dedicated in 2004, the Memorial has since welcomed 100 
     million visitors. Congresswoman Kaptur continues to teach the 
     lessons of the war, and promote values of unity, and 
     cooperation. Her legislative and community efforts foster 
     bipartisan cooperation, emphasizing common ground and 
     governance. Here to present Congresswoman Marcy Kaptur with 
     the Brigadier General Charles E. McGee Unity Award is Yvonne 
     McGee, daughter of the late General McGee.

       I just want to say its an honor to be here to represent my 
     father, and he would be here to represent, as this award is 
     all the men and women of that generation. He used to love to 
     talk with young people. He always gave him his 4 Ps, I think 
     you exemplify all of those, which is perceive, prepare, 
     perform, and persevere, which I know you had to do to get 
     this to happen. So, its our honor, and thank you to Holly 
     and everyone from the World War II Memorial. Thank you.

       Congratulations Congresswoman Kaptur.
with the introduction of H. 
Res. 1261, I join my colleagues on the House Committee on Homeland 
Security in commemorating the 100th anniversary of the creation of the 
United States Border Patrol. It is important that we honor the service 
and sacrifices of the men and women of the U.S. Border Patrol and their 
families, past and present.
  Since the U.S. Border Patrols creation on May 28, 1924, Border 
Patrol agents have shown commitment and dedication to safeguarding our 
Nation by securing and protecting our borders.
  The U.S. Border Patrol has seen its mission expand greatly since its 
first stations opened in Detroit, Michigan, and El Paso, Texas, in 
1924. Congress expanded its duties to patrolling the seacoast in 1925. 
U.S. Border Patrols Air Operations officially commenced in 1941.
  The tragic events of September 11, 2001, underscored the importance 
of homeland security and led to significant enhancements in U.S. Border 
Patrol operations.
  With each new mission set, the men and women of the U.S. Border 
Patrol have consistently risen to the challenge. As we mark the 
agencys centennial, we particularly remember the 156 Border Patrol 
agents who made the ultimate sacrifice in the line of duty.
  The United States Border Patrol has overcome significant challenges 
while protecting Americans and our national security. I take this 
opportunity to thank the nearly 20,000 agents currently protecting the 
6,000 miles of international land borders and 2,000 miles of coastal 
waters. I also celebrate the agents who came before them and the 
families who endure great sacrifices and provide unwavering support to 
those who serve in the United States Border Patrol.
it is with sincere admiration that I take 
this time to recognize one of Northwest Indianas finest organizations, 
Leons Heroes, as it will once again host the annual Leons Triathlon, 
widely known as ``Americas Race. This outstanding display of 
patriotism and athleticism honors our veterans and active service 
members, with a special focus on those who have sustained injuries 
during their time in service. This years event will be held at Wolf 
Lake in Hammond, Indiana, and will include static displays, 
festivities, and opening ceremonies leading up to the start of the race 
on Sunday, June 2, 2024.
  Founded in 1983 by Leon Wolek, an avid triathlete and native of 
Hobart, Indiana, Leons Triathlon has drawn participants from across 
the country and has been a source of immense pride for the Northwest 
Indiana community. Having grown up admiring his father who served in 
the military, and spending time with and listening to the stories of 
other veterans at American Legion Post 454 in New Chicago, Indiana, 
Leon was compelled to ensure that the many brave individuals who have 
defended our nation throughout its history received the recognition 
they deserve. With this idea in mind, Leons Triathlon emerged.
  Originally, the race took place in Leons hometown of Hobart at the 
Izaak Walton League before its popularity and corresponding growth 
required its relocation. The city of Hammond, Indiana, was inspired by 
the organizations unwavering commitment to those who serve and have 
served our country and proudly welcomed the special event to the city. 
Fittingly, a portion of the race now runs along the Gold Star Memorial 
Highway, a designation which Leons Heroes was instrumental in 
securing, and is dedicated to Indiana families who have lost loved ones 
in service. Leons Triathlon has seen immense growth in participation 
since its inception, and many of the participants are veterans and 
active military members. As participation has grown so too has the 
number of events, which now includes additional events throughout the 
year. Since 2021, Leons Heroes has also hosted an annual obstacle 
course event which takes place every September at Indiana Dunes 
National Park. This event recalls the attacks of September 11, 2001, 
while honoring our veterans and the many first responders who came to 
aid our fellow citizens on that tragic day.
, throughout its history, Leons Heroes has remained 
steadfast in its commitment to honoring the legacy of our military 
members, past and present. I ask you and my other distinguished 
colleagues to join me in commending the organization for its 
outstanding dedication to the community, to our veterans, to our active 
service members, and to our first responders. Leon Wolek and the many 
devoted volunteers involved with this extraordinary organization are 
truly worthy of our highest praise.
today, I introduce the National Commission 
to Combat Workplace Sexual Harassment Act, which would establish a 
national commission to combat sexual harassment in the workplace. I 
have modeled this bill on bills Congress has passed to establish 
commissions to address other national problems. Specifically, this bill 
would establish a commission to carry out a comprehensive investigation 
and study of workplace sexual harassment in the United States.
  A national commission would assure the American people that Congress 
takes sexual harassment seriously, beyond just the high-profile 
workplace instances. Most importantly, the commission would hear from a 
cross section of workers--from office and factory workers to retail and 
food service workers. The commission could travel or invite witnesses 
to the District of Columbia from throughout the country to recommend 
changes in laws or regulations and best practices to prevent, 
investigate, respond to and penalize sexual harassment in the private 
and public sectors.
  Our constituents expect Congress to take on the problem of sexual 
harassment throughout our national economy. A national commission could 
help reach and reduce sexual harassment, a form of gender 
discrimination, where the average American works.
  I strongly urge my colleagues to support this bill.
on Tuesday, May 22, 2024, I was unable to 
vote on Roll Call No. 122. Had I been present, I would have voted as 
follows: YEA on Roll Call No. 122.
today I want to recognize Sergent Christopher 
Killion, resident of Dearborn in Michigans 12th District Strong, for 
his service in the United States Army.
  This year, Sergeant Killion, a three-time Purple Heart recipient, 
being honored by the City of Dearborn as a Grand Marshal in their 
annual Memorial Day events. Sergeant Chris Killion was born in Detroit 
and raised in Dearborn Heights. He joined the Army in 2001 and was 
deployed to Iraq in 2003, where he was wounded multiple times. Sergeant 
Killion left the Army with the rank of E-5. He currently lives in 
Dearborn and is a member of several veteran organizations, including 
the Military Order of the Purple Heart, the Dearborn Allied Veterans 
Council, the Polish Legion of American Veterans, and Veterans of 
Foreign Wars.
  Please join me in recognizing Sergeant Christopher Killion, for his 
outstanding service, and as Grand Marshal of the City of Dearborns 
ninety-eighth Memorial Day festivities.
today I want to recognize United States Navy 
Seaman Edward Gorczyk for his service to our Nation, as he serves as 
Grand Marshal of the City of Dearborns ninety-eighth Memorial Day 
festivities.
1966. While serving, his ship was 
hit directly by rockets. Drawing on resilience and teamwork, Gorczyk 
and his crew were able to escape danger and reach safety. For their 
bravery and injuries sustained, Gorczyk and his fellow crew members 
were awarded Purple Hearts.
  In 1968, after an honorable discharge, Gorczyk left the Navy as a 
seaman. He returned home to Michigan to study photography at Macomb 
County Community College after his service. He remains an active member 
of the Vietnam Veterans of America--James Huard Chapter 267 and The 
American Legion Post 364.
  Please join me in recognizing Seaman Edward Gorczyk, for his 
commendable service to our Nation.
today I want to recognize Marine Corps Lance 
Corporal George Cassar, Purple Heart recipient, for his service to our 
Nation, as he serves as Grand Marshall of the City of Dearborns 
ninety-eighth Memorial Day festivities.
  Lance Corporal Cassar joined the Marine Corps in October 1966 and 
served until 1969. During his service, Cassar displayed remarkable 
bravery and perseverance, earning two Purple Hearts. The first was 
awarded after his tank was hit by a rocket, and the second was given 
when he was wounded by shrapnel. Since his retirement from military 
service, Lance Corporal Cassar continues to serve his community, 
coaching basketball for an impressive forty-seven years.
  Please join me in recognizing Lance Corporal George Cassar for his 
service to our Nation.
I rise today in honor of Jewish American 
Heritage Month and to recognize an extraordinary individual from 
Rochester, NY, whose accomplishments and contributions have left a 
lasting impact on our region: Howard Konar.
  Howard Konar has a longstanding history of leadership in Rochester 
and has done extensive philanthropic work locally and across the 
country. He serves as a trustee for the William &amp; Sheila Konar 
Foundation supporting Jewish life and culture and as a member of the 
Board of Governors for the Jewish Federation of Greater Rochester. In 
2008, then-President George W. Bush named Howard to the council of the 
United States Holocaust Memorial Museum in Washington. His positive 
influence can be felt across every facet of our Jewish community.
  During Jewish American Heritage Month, it is my privilege to 
recognize Howard Konar. He has dedicated himself to honoring the 
history of the Jewish people and has worked tirelessly to strengthen 
the future of our local Jewish neighbors.
I rise today in honor of Jewish American 
Heritage Month and to recognize an outstanding individual from 
Rochester, NY, whose contributions have made a lasting impact on our 
local Jewish community: Isobel Goldman
  Isobel Goldman served for 18 years as Director of Community Relations 
at the Jewish Federation. In that capacity, she created and directed 
the Rochester Jewish Coalition for Literacy, which started with six 
volunteers and under her leadership, grew to over 200 people who went 
once a week to Rochester City Schools to assist with students in K-6 
with literacy skills. She also served as the Director of Grants at the 
Max and Marian Farash Charitable Foundation where she started the First 
in Family College Tuition-free program, led Jewish Education 
programming, and started an initiative to help fund scholarships for 
teens hoping to travel to Israel. She has truly embodied the spirit of 
service to others.
  This Jewish American Heritage Month, it is my honor and privilege to 
recognize Isobel Goldman. Her extraordinary legacy has uplifted the 
lives of everyone who calls Rochester home and will continue to inspire 
us all for decades to come.
I rise today in honor of Jewish American 
Heritage Month and to recognize an exemplary individual from Rochester, 
NY, who is making a profound impact on our Jewish community: Joy 
Getnick.
  Joy Getnick serves as the Executive Director of the University of 
Rochester Hillel. She has quietly but powerfully done vital work over 
these last several months guiding our young students, particularly with 
the rise of antisemitism on campus and throughout society. She is an 
educator and leader not just on campus, but across all of Rochester. 
Joy is also the founding director of Camp Seneca Lake in Israel, a 
summer Israel program for teens. Her commitment to uplifting and 
mentoring students is helping to shape the next generation of leaders, 
and her legacy will live on through each of the lives she has touched.
  Jewish American History Month is the perfect opportunity to recognize 
and honor our local Jewish neighbors who are working diligently to make 
our community a better place. I can think of no better example than Joy 
Getnick, and I commend her for her many accomplishments.
today I stand before you to recognize May 
2024 as National Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) Awareness Month. 
We honor individuals who have been affected by ALS and pledge 
unwavering support to patients and their families.
  Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), known by many as Lou Gehrigs 
disease, is a progressive fatal neurodegenerative disease in which the 
nerve cells in the brain and spinal cord stop working and die. Over 
time, a persons mind loses connection with the muscles, slowly taking 
away the ability to walk, talk, eat, and eventually breathe. After 
symptoms develop, most patients only live for another 2-5 years, and 
despite its destructive nature, currently no one knows what causes most 
cases of ALS and there are no cures. Today, an estimated 31,000 people 
in the United States are living with ALS.
  In order to combat this devastating illness, we must increase 
education and support research. ALS Awareness Month deepens the 
publics awareness of people with ALS dire circumstances, and 
acknowledges the terrible impact this disease has, not only on the 
person, but on his or her family and the community. It further 
recognizes the research being done to eradicate this disease and is why 
I sign an annual appropriations letter each year requesting increased 
funding for ALS research. Our commitment to accelerating the pace of 
discovery must remain unwavering, fueled by the hope that one day, ALS 
will be a livable disease for everyone, everywhere, until we can cure 
it.
, I ask that my colleagues in the House join me in 
celebrating the month of May to advocate for patients fighting ALS and 
for the tireless work of the families, caretakers, and researchers 
supporting those affected by this relentless disease.
I rise today in recognition of Will Neitzel, 
a member of my staff for the last five and a half years. Will joined my 
team as I opened a new office and started my first term, serving 
Wisconsins First Congressional District. Will has been an integral 
member of my team.
  While serving in my personal office, Wills candor, hard work, and 
humor have been tremendous assets to my office. When first starting my 
office, Will was essential in getting my mail program up and running, 
working tirelessly to produce dozens of letters each week. As a policy 
staffer Will helped Wisconsin families and small businesses better 
understand and navigate federal programs.
  After serving as one of my lead staffers in my personal office, Will 
then moved to the Committee on House Administration when I became 
Chairman in January of 2022. Will quickly became my Wisconsin advocate 
with the Committee, always thinking of ways House Administration can 
benefit the people of Wisconsins First District. Will also jumped 
right in and helped lead the Committees widely successful ``Running an 
Effective Committee in the Majority Series, ``Level Up: GOP Staff 
Development Course, and the ``Intern Lecture Series, among many 
others.
  With Will as a part of my Member Services team, the Committee has 
held briefings and education trainings for over 2,000 Members of 
Congress and their staff. This team has also successfully completed 
over 600 Member-related requests. Will also spearheaded the planting of 
the Sugar Maple tree on the U.S. Capitol Grounds commemorating the 
175th anniversary of the State of Wisconsin.
, there is no doubt in my mind that the great people of 
Wisconsin are better off because of Wills service here in the U.S.

House of Representatives. Im so appreciative to have had him in my 
personal and committee offices. On behalf of my personal office and the 
Committee on House Administration, we want to thank Will for his great 
services and friendship. We wish the very best of success to Will, 
Steph, Jack, and Ada as they start a new chapter back home in 
Wisconsin.
I rise today in honor of Jewish American 
Heritage Month and to recognize an extraordinary individual from 
Rochester, NY, who is making a profound impact on our Jewish community: 
Thomas Fink.
  Tom Fink is the embodiment of service in my hometown. Tom is a past 
president of Temple Brith Kodesh and a former National Board Member of 
the Union of Reform Jewish Congregations. He has been active in 
volunteer work and social activism for decades, particularly on the 
issue of homelessness and affordable housing. He has dedicated himself 
time and time again to bettering our region, going above and beyond to 
serve his neighbors in ways both big and small.
  During Jewish American Heritage Month, it is my privilege to 
recognize Thomas Fink for his selflessness, generosity, and dedication 
to uplifting our Jewish community. Rochester is a better and brighter 
place because of his leadership. His legacy will leave a lasting mark 
on all those whose lives he has touched.