I am pleased to congratulate Lititz Borough 
Police Chief Kerry Nye on his retirement after 45 years in law 
enforcement.
  Kerry Nye began his career with the Lititz Borough Police Department 
in 1980 and has remained there since, becoming a sergeant in 1994 and 
the Chief of Police in 2016. A staple of Chief Nyes leadership was his 
geniality and his visibility in the community. He planned emergency 
services events, such as cancer treatment fundraisers, and was a 
central figure in special occasions throughout Lititz Borough.
  His dedication to serving the community extends beyond the Lititz 
Borough Police Department, as he served with the Boy Scouts for more 
than 30 years.
  Once again, I want to thank Chief Nye for his selfless efforts 
serving and protecting Lititz Borough. I wish him the best in his well-
deserved retirement.
I rise today to recognize the 100th 
anniversary of the Jamestown High School Band and Chorus, we honor a 
century of musical excellence and dedication that has profoundly 
enriched both the school and broader community.
  Established in 1924 by siblings Arthur and Ebba Goranson, these 
ensembles have become pillars of artistic achievement. Under Arthurs 
leadership, the band gained national recognition, performing in 
prestigious events such as the Macys Thanksgiving Day Parade and the 
Tournament of Roses Parade. Ebbas pioneering efforts led the formation 
of the A Cappella Choir, renowned for its annual Vespers services and 
international performances, earning the moniker ``Choir of the 
Cathedrals.
  Over the decades, these programs have fostered generations of 
talented musicians, instilling values of discipline, collaboration and 
cultural appreciation. As we celebrate this milestone, we commend and 
express deep gratitude to the past, present and future directors, 
instructors and students whose passion and dedication continue to 
inspire the Jamestown community and uphold this remarkable legacy for 
generations to come.
I rise today to honor my fellow Hoosier, 
John Michael Green, for his contributions to literature, entertainment, 
and education, and in recognition of his latest book, Everything is 
Tuberculosis, which debuted on March 18, 2025.
  As a globally-recognized New York Times bestselling author, Johns 
works include Looking for Alaska, The Fault in Our Stars, Paper Towns, 
and Turtles All the Way Down, as well as contributing to vlogs, 
podcasts, articles, live-action shows, motion pictures, and more. 
Through their Indianapolis-based Crash Course YouTube channel, John and 
his brother Hank have reached millions of people worldwide with over 65 
accessible and engaging educational video series. John has long used 
his platform to foster philanthropy and advocacy, including as an 
advocate for Indianapolis, earning him the title ``Indys best hype 
man.
  Since 2019, Johns focus has turned to global health and the fight to 
eradicate tuberculosis. Recognizing the artificial barriers to 
tuberculosis treatment in developing nations, Johns advocacy has 
lowered the cost of lifesaving drugs and testing equipment and directed 
millions of dollars to underfunded tuberculosis health programs. 
Recognized as a ``TB Elimination Champion by the Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention, John continues to highlight the tuberculosis 
crisis through his newest release, Everything is Tuberculosis.
  I ask my colleagues to join me in honoring John Green for his 
meaningful contributions to literature, education, and global health. 
His work continues to inspire, educate, and make a lasting difference 
in Indianapolis, across the Nation, and around the world.
HONORING MAYOR ESTEBAN ``STEVE BOVO, JR.
-BALART. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to recognize an 
outstanding public servant, a venerated leader in South Florida, and a 
dear friend of mine, Mayor Esteban ``Steve Bovo, Jr.
  For years, Mayor Bovo has dedicated himself unreservedly to this 
shared mission of serving with honor the people of Hialeah. He 
consistently maintained the highest standards of leadership and a clear 
vision for Hialeah: to bring our community to new heights.
  As the son of Cuban exiles whose family was forced into exile in 
search of freedom and opportunity, he understands firsthand the 
importance of democracy and freedom. His father, the heroic Esteban 
Bovo Caras, served courageously as a pilot of the 2506 Brigade,

the group of brave Cuban exiles who fought in the Bay of Pigs invasion. 
This created a legacy for the Bovo family that Mayor Bovo would carry 
throughout his life and career. Growing up in a household that 
ingrained in him the value of sacrifice and of civic duty, Mayor Bovo 
developed a strong sense of responsibility to serve others and to 
defend the values that his family and so many others have fought to 
preserve.
  From his time serving in the Florida House of Representatives, to his 
leadership at the county and municipal levels, Mayor Bovo has 
successfully championed policies that protect small businesses, improve 
public safety, and preserve the unique culture that defines South 
Florida. During his time as a Miami-Dade County Commissioner from 2011 
to 2020, Mayor Bovo demonstrated his dedication to fiscal 
responsibility and government transparency. He has always been a 
champion for the hardworking families of our community, advocating for 
lower taxes and ensuring that local government remains accountable to 
the people it serves.
  Since taking office as Mayor of Hialeah in 2021, Mayor Bovo has 
proven in word and deed his commitment to our community. He has 
supported local law enforcement, stood with our first responders, and 
has never wavered in his mission of seeing our community thrive. His 
hands-on approach to leading the people of Hialeah has solidified his 
reputation as a trusted, effective, and admired leader in our 
community.
  Beyond his official duties, Mayor Bovo has always remained deeply and 
personally engaged with the community. Whether supporting local 
businesses, expanding youth development programs, working with 
nonprofit organizations, or attending neighborhood events, he has 
proven his dedication to serving and knowing the people he serves. 
Above all, Mayor Bovo is a loving husband to Viviana and a proud father 
to his five children; Oscar, Bianca, Esteban, Sofia, and Alessandro.
  I am honored to recognize today my dear friend Mayor Esteban Bovo for 
his decades of service and his devotion to our community. He is a true 
public servant, a man of the utmost integrity, and a cherished leader 
who has earned the respect and gratitude of the people he has served.
I rise today to commemorate the career of 
(Nate) Lampman, Director of Bands at Saline Community 
Schools, on the occasion of his retirement. For nearly three decades, 
During his career as Director of Bands, Mr, Lampman directly touched 
the lives of over 3,000 students and impacted the lives of many others. 
Under his encouragement and care, Mr. Lampman led many of Salines 
student musicians to great personal successes, including prestigious 
membership in the Michigan School Band and Orchestra Associations 
``All State Bands. Due in no small part to Mr. Lampmans leadership, 
the Saline Bands have achieved consistent musical excellence, as 
evidenced by the 1st division ratings that the Saline High School 
Marching Band routinely receives at marching band competitions.
In 2017, he received the Michigan 
Association of Teacher Educators Teacher of the Year Award for the 
State of Michigan. In association with Mr. Lampmans consistent 
leadership in the Michigan School Band and Orchestra Association, he 
was voted as District Teacher of the Year in both 2007 and 2015.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in honoring Mr. Nate 
Lampman for his decades of dedication to this school district. I 
sincerely thank Nate for his many years of service to his community, 
and join with his family, friends, and colleagues in extending my best 
wishes to him in his well-deserved retirement.
MOURNING THE LOSS OF WALTON COUNTYS SHERIFF DEPUTY WILLIAM ``WILL 
                               of florida
I rise today with a heavy heart to 
honor Deputy William ``Will Paul Thomas May, who made the ultimate 
sacrifice defending his community in the line of duty. Deputy May was a 
dedicated officer, family man, and lifelong Floridian who demonstrates 
the best that our state has to offer. Deputy Mays courageous actions 
underscore the dangers that law enforcement faces every day while 
protecting our communities. I believe I can speak on behalf of the 
constituents of Floridas second congressional district in saying that 
we are deeply moved by Deputy Mays sacrifice in the name of our 
safety. We collectively mourn the passing of this outstanding public 
servant.
  Deputy May was born on January 28, 1987, in Fort Walton Beach, 
Florida, to William Alex May and Sandra Dee Hargrave Asher. Deputy May 
went above and beyond during his 11-year career in law enforcement. He 
served in both Walton Countys field training program as an instructor 
and in the breathalyzer program, eventually earning the Life Saving 
Award Certificate. On top of his impressive law enforcement career, he 
was a dedicated husband to his wife, Crystal, and an exemplary father 
to his four children: Zane, Clarice, Layla, and Tracker. Outside of 
work, Deputy May was known for being a pillar of the community, who 
enjoyed playing cornhole and cheering on Alabama football with his 
neighbors.
. I ask my colleagues to join me in honoring 
. May his sacrifice serve as a 
reminder that this body must always support our law enforcement and 
ensure that they have all the support necessary to safely protect our 
communities.
I missed Roll Call Vote No. 88. Had I 
been present, I would have voted YEA on Roll Call No. 88.
I rise today to honor and 
recognize the outstanding service, leadership, and unwavering 
dedication of Ms. Christine Krzysiak, who has served as the Crawford 
County Treasurer and Director of the Crawford County Tax Claim Bureau. 
In addition to these positions, Ms. Krzysiak has also served as the 
appointed Tax Collector for current county real estate taxes for the 
City of Titusville--duties she has carried out with professionalism and 
integrity.
  Throughout her tenure, Ms. Krzysiak has demonstrated a commitment to 
public service and to the residents of Crawford County. Her extensive 
knowledge, attention to detail, and tireless work ethic have not only 
ensured the responsible management of county finances but have also 
earned her the respect and admiration of colleagues, local officials, 
and community members alike.
a deep sense of duty and pride in her 
work. Her efforts have directly contributed to the effective operation 
of county government and have helped maintain the financial health and 
transparency so essential to public trust.
  As Ms. Krzysiak prepares to embark on her well-deserved retirement, 
we commend her many years of dedicated service. We thank her for her 
invaluable contributions to Crawford County and extend our heartfelt 
best wishes for happiness, good health, and fulfillment in the years 
ahead.
I rise today to honor Jake Tyner for his 
career in the United States Congress.
  A Towson, Maryland native, Jake began his career in Washington, D.C. 
in 2016 as Director and Associate Policy Counsel of the Global Energy 
Institute for the United States Chamber of Commerce after receiving his 
bachelors degree from Elon University and his Juris Doctorate from the 
University of Baltimore School of Law. In 2020, Jake came to the United 
States of House of Representatives as Policy Advisor and Counsel to 
Congressman David McKinley (WV-01) before becoming General Counsel to 
Senator Dan Sullivan of Alaska. Through these roles, Jake proved his 
expertise in energy and environmental policy. As Chairman of the House 
Committee on Energy and Commerce, I was pleased to have him as a member 
of my team as Chief Counsel for the Environment Subcommittee to help 
develop and implement the committees legislative agenda.
  Recently, Jake accepted a role in President Trumps administration to 
serve under Secretary of Interior Doug Burgum, as Deputy Solicitor for 
Energy and Mineral Resources. I know Jake will be a valuable asset to 
Secretary Burgum, President Trump, and the American people, the same 
way he was for me and the members of the House Committee on Energy and 
Commerce. I thank him, congratulate him on his new role, and wish him 
the best in his future.
I rise today to recognize the 
month of April as Sarcoidosis Awareness Month.
  Sarcoidosis is a rare inflammatory disease characterized by the 
formation of granulomas--tiny clumps of inflammatory cells--in one or 
more organs of the body. When the immune system goes into overdrive and 
too many of these clumps form, they can interfere with an organs 
structure and function. When left unchecked, chronic inflammation can 
lead to fibrosis, which is the permanent scarring of organ tissue. This 
disorder affects the lungs in approximately 90 percent of cases, but it 
can affect almost any organ in the body.
  Despite increasing advances in research, sarcoidosis remains 
difficult to diagnose with limited treatment options and no known cure. 
Sarcoidosis is considered chronic in people whose disease remains 
active for more than 2 to 5 years; in this population sarcoidosis can 
be debilitating and life-threatening. Its estimated that the 
prevalence of sarcoidosis in the U.S. ranges between 150,000 and 
200,000 with an estimated 1.2 million individuals with sarcoidosis 
worldwide.
  I am proud to have the Foundation for Sarcoidosis Research (FSR) 
based in my district, in the city of Chicago. Ive had the chance to 
meet wonderful patient advocates and hear their stories. FSR is 
committed to advancing pivotal research and improving the lives of all 
impacted by sarcoidosis and has funded over 7 million dollars to 
support academic research to better understand the cause, mechanisms of 
progression, and the effective and efficient path to better patient 
outcomes.
  Most recently, I worked with FSR to address a lack of clarity from 
the Department of Labor regarding whether or not clinical trial 
participation was a permissible use of leave under the Family and 
Medical Leave Act (FMLA). Like other chronic and rare disease patient 
populations, clinical trial access is critically important for patients 
with sarcoidosis, as there is no cure and there is a lack of treatment 
options. When requesting time off to participate in clinical trials, 
some patients have been denied as HR departments have not interpreted 
clinical trial participation as a permissible use of leave under FMLA. 
I, along with other Congress members and leading stakeholder 
organizations such as FSR, reached out to the DOL to get this 
clarification. Fortunately, the DOL responded confirming that they 
interpret clinical trial participation, when medically necessary, is a 
permissible use of leave under FMLA. It further clarified that both 
patients and caregivers are guaranteed job protection under FMLA, when 
meeting the necessary requirements and choosing to participate in 
clinical trials. This effort extends beyond sarcoidosis and extends to 
all those seeking to participate in clinical trials. I am now working 
to spread awareness of this finding, so employers, employees, HR 
departments and patients are aware of proper use of leave under FMLA.

  This year marks the 25th Anniversary of the establishment of the 
Foundation for Sarcoidosis Research. In celebration of this 
accomplishment and years of innovation, empowerment and progress, I 
call on my colleagues to recognize the goals and ideals of Sarcoidosis 
Awareness Month by supporting federal activities that improve the lives 
of patients impacted by Sarcoidosis, and to raise awareness and shine a 
light on the 1.2 million people living with Sarcoidosis.
I rise today to honor the career of David 
McCormack as he retires after 34 years of service to the U.S. 
Citizenship and Immigration Services agency. Over the course of his 
tenure, David has been a tremendous public servant in his role as a 
district congressional lead.
  David has hosted numerous congressional outreach meetings to bring 
together staffers and federal agency representatives, to keep our 
government engaged at the local level with trends in immigration cases. 
Throughout the course of his career, David consistently ensured Granite 
Staters received the support

they deserved and was able to help with any inquiries that came his 
way.
  David is not only a diligent public servant, but a man of outstanding 
character. For instance, when congressional liaison tragically passed 
in 2023, it was David who compassionately stepped in to coordinate 
communications to congressional staff and provide details regarding 
funeral arrangements.
  In all, David McCormack represents the very best of Americas public 
servants--dedicated, thoughtful, and unwavering in his commitment in 
service to others. On behalf of a grateful district, I want to 
congratulate David on a well deserved and restful retirement.
today I reintroduce the ``Forest Legacy 
Management Flexibility Act, alongside Representative Ken Calvert (R-
CA). I thank my colleagues, Representatives Jim Costa (D-CA), Josh 
Harder (D-CA), Kevin Mullin (D-CA), and Suzanne Bonamici (D-OR) for 
cosponsoring my bill.
  As the former Deputy Secretary of the Interior, I know our national 
conservation goals cannot be achieved through public land ownership 
alone. The federal and state governments can and must work with private 
landowners who want to do their part to conserve Americas natural 
landscapes, as my family did for our cattle ranch in 1998. This bill 
would unlock millions in federal funding to help states conserve 
working forestlands, create local jobs, and support sustainable forest 
management practices that reduce wildfire risk.
  Specifically, the ``Forest Legacy Management Flexibility Act would 
allow States to choose to designate accredited, nonprofit land trusts 
to hold conservation easements purchased with federal funding under the 
U.S. Forest Services Forest Legacy Program. Current law requires that 
only the federal or state governments can hold conservation easements 
purchased under the Forest Legacy Program.
  Allowing States participating in the federal Forest Legacy Program 
the flexibility to partner with accredited, nonprofit land trusts will 
help permanently conserve more land by working with private landowners 
who want to have their land conserved but are wary of selling the 
federal or state governments an easement on their property. Expanding 
opportunities to conserve working forestlands will benefit our rural 
economies and encourage sustainable forest management practices that 
help prevent wildfires.
  This bill maintains the integrity of the Forest Legacy Program by 
holding all accredited, nonprofit land trusts participating in the 
Program to the highest possible standards. In addition, it implements 
safeguards to prevent misuse of the Program and allows the U.S. Forest 
Service or State to reclaim easements if a land trust falls into 
noncompliance with the Program.
  By unlocking new opportunities and funding for permanent land 
conservation, the ``Forest Legacy Management Flexibility Act takes a 
critical step towards protecting our countrys natural resources and 
forests for future generations. My colleagues and I are honored to 
reintroduce this legislation to preserve Americas working forests and 
bolster our rural economies. Mr. Speaker, I encourage all members to 
join us in cosponsoring this bill.
Title IV of Senate Resolution 4, agreed to by the Senate of February 
4, 1977, calls for establishment of a system for a computerized 
schedule of all meetings and hearings of Senate committees, 
subcommittees, joint committees, and committees of conference. This 
title requires all such committees to notify the Office of the Senate 
Daily Digest--designated by the Rules Committee--of the time, place and 
purpose of the meetings, when scheduled and any cancellations or 
changes in the meetings as they occur.
  As an additional procedure along with the computerization of this 
information, the Office of the Senate Daily Digest will prepare this 
information for printing in the Extensions of Remarks section of the 
Congressional Record on Monday and Wednesday of each week.
  Meetings scheduled for Thursday, April 10, 2025 may be found in the 
Daily Digest of todays Record.

                                APRIL 30
     10:30 a.m.
       Committee on Appropriations
         To hold hearings to examine biomedical research, focusing 
           on keeping Americas edge in innovation.
                                                            SD-106