I rise today to recognize a very special 
occasion for UAW Local 14 in my District. Tomorrow, on Wednesday, 
October 1, 2025, the union will celebrate 90 Years of Solidarity: A 
Milestone for UAW Local 14 . . . a testament to the enduring strength, 
unity, and unwavering spirit of our membership.
  Throughout the decades, UAW Local 14 has been at the vanguard of 
manufacturing while at the same time ensuring worker rights, dignity 
and economic fairness, making history while leaving a legacy of 
accomplishments that continues to benefit workers across the Nation.
  In 1935 a strike was called at Chevrolet Toledo. During the three-
week strike, full bargaining rights were established as well as 
seniority. These key elements laid the foundation for the unions 
strength yet today.
  In 1936 a national agreement, led by founder Bob Travis, allowed for 
the saving of the Chevrolet plant. This effort to spread unionization 
began with a 44-day ``sit-down strike and demonstrated the strength 
of solidarity.
  One of the most difficult strikes in Toledo--fifty years after the 
deadly Auto-Lite Strike--was the 285-day AP Parts strike. The union 
held firm through this challenge to bring about a resolution beneficial 
to all.
  Turning toward the future, UAW Local 14, General Motors, and Toledo 
Public Schools

came together in partnership to establish the Toledo Technology 
Academy. The legendary Local 14 leader Oscar Bunch, understanding the 
critical need for training in the advanced technologies taking shape, 
secured this innovative Toledo Public School in 1997 which thrives 
today.
  Through the years UAW Local 14 has been an established and integral 
part of the fabric of our community, ensuring security for current 
workers and retirees, as well as making its mark on our community.
  The union notes: ``We stand on the shoulders of giants and are 
immensely proud of our history. As we move forward, UAW local 14 is 
committed to remaining a powerful, essential voice in our union and our 
community for many years to come.
  The great labor leader Walter Reuther explained, ``There is no 
greater calling than to serve your brother. There is no greater 
contribution than to help the weak. There is no greater satisfaction 
than to have done it well. Throughout its nearly century of service, 
UAW Local 14 has met this challenge with honor.
  I thank the Local 14 leadership--Tony Totty, Bernie LaPoint, Jr., Sue 
Rodgers, Rhoni Clark, Henry McCoy, all the shop stewards, and all their 
predecessors for their courage, consistency, and care. Ninety years is 
no small achievement. It is a testament to shared purpose, to 
collective power, and to neighborhoods knit together by trust and work.
  May the halls of this Union always echo with the voices of the proud 
and the hopeful. May Local 14 forever remain a pillar for workers, for 
Toledo, and for Northwest Ohio.
  We applaud 90 glorious years of solidary, struggle, and strength and 
look toward a future carrying forward these ideals.
I rise today with immense 
pride to recognize Dalilah Garcia, President of FemCity Brownsville, of 
a women empowerment organization.
2025 Women of 
Distinction by the Texas Association of Mexican American Chambers of 
Commerce (TAMACC) for her unstoppable resilience, dedication to female 
empowerment, and rich cultural heritage.
  Dalilah Garcia is an example of what it means to build community, 
leadership, and foster inclusivity. She boasts over five years of 
experience in public relations, business, organizational development, 
and project management.
  Prior to her role as President of FemCity Brownsville, Ms. Garcia 
served as a Census Media Specialist at the U.S. Economic Development 
Administration (EDA).
  After her work with the EDA, she assumed her role as President of 
FemCity Brownsville in December of 2017. In her current role, she 
collaborates and organizes monthly gatherings, workshops, and business 
support services for women in our community hoping to become 
entrepreneurs and success stories in their own right.
  In addition to her professional endeavors, Ms. Garcia is a recipient 
of the 2025 Estrella de Tejas Award. This award is presented to 
outstanding Hispanic women who have made great contributions to their 
local communities and serve as role models for other women.
, on behalf of South Texas, I wish to honor Dalilah Garcia 
for her commitment to women empowerment and our community. Her advocacy 
has changed the landscape of our region, and her story is only just 
beginning.
I am pleased to congratulate and recognize 
Goodhart Sons Inc. on their 90th anniversary. Goodhart Sons Inc. is a 
steel fabricator and installer based in Lancaster, Pennsylvania. Their 
history began in 1935 when Frank G. Goodhart purchased the two-man 
sheet metal shop that he was once an apprentice at. In the 90 years 
since Goodharts founding, Frank and successive generations of family 
leadership have tapped into new markets, both in their customer base 
and the regions they serve. The projects they have worked on vary, 
ranging from food and beverage equipment to ductwork and even 
hovercraft. Goodhart Sons moved to their current facility in 1971, 
which has continued to expand with each generation.
  Today, Goodhart Sons Inc. is under fourth-generation leadership and 
employs over one hundred people. Goodhart Sons has built a reputation 
for large industrial work, and their installation team has worked 
across the United States and other countries. Goodhart Sons is also 
committed to the local community, best shown through their charitable 
donations and workforce development investments.
  For 90 eventful years, Goodhart Sons Inc. has been a business and 
community leader in Pennsylvanias 11th District. I am grateful for the 
Goodhart family for their positive impact and wish them many more years 
of success.
I rise today along with my colleague 
Congressman David Valadao to honor Jenny Holtermann, a fourth-
generation California farmer, water advocate, and strong communicator 
who has worked tirelessly to preserve family farming, elevate womens 
voices in agriculture, and strengthen the connection between growers 
and consumers. As she steps down as President of the Kern County Farm 
Bureau, we have no doubt her leadership and service will continue to 
influence the Central Valley and its farming community.
  Jenny was born and raised on her familys almond and walnut farm in 
Chico, California.

She earned a degree in Agricultural Business Marketing with a minor in 
Fruit Science from Cal Poly, San Luis Obispo, where she met her 
husband, Tim. After graduation, they moved to the Central Valley to 
continue their families farming legacies.
  Since marrying in 2010, Jenny and Tim have farmed almonds in Wasco 
and Shafter, instilling the values of hard work, stewardship, and love 
of the land in their children. Before her advocacy work, Jenny spent 
five years in agricultural sales and later became a freelance writer, 
using her platform to connect farmers with consumers. Known as ``Almond 
Girl Jenny, she has shared stories as a blogger, social media content 
creator, and freelance writer, strengthening the public connection to 
agriculture.
  Jennys leadership began early when she helped revitalize the Kern 
Young Farmers &amp; Ranchers in 2011, serving as Chair for two years, and 
later as California YF&amp;R State Chair in 2018. She has been a Kern 
County Farm Bureau Board member since 2011, serving in multiple 
leadership roles, and has represented Kern and Kings counties on the 
California Farm Bureau Board since 2018. Beyond Farm Bureau, Jennys 
service extends to the Almond Board of California Leadership Program, 
the Wasco Planning Commission, and California Women for Agriculture. 
She also brings a wealth of knowledge in water management and currently 
serves as Executive Director for multiple water agencies.
  In 2020, Jenny and Tim launched a direct-to-consumer almond business, 
sharing their family farm and farm-fresh almonds with households across 
the country while continuing daily farm life with their young family.
, Congressman David Valadao and I invite our colleagues to 
join us in recognizing Jenny Holtermann for her dedication to family 
farming, leadership in agriculture, and service to her community, which 
have left a lasting mark on Kern County and the broader agricultural 
industry. Her years of service and commitment to agriculture have 
strengthened the Farm Bureau and inspired meaningful progress 
throughout the agricultural community. We wish her continued success as 
she moves forward from her role at the Kern County Farm Bureau.
I rise to honor the service and career of 
community leader Lynn Adams in celebration of her retirement. Since 
2007, Lynn has served as the President of the Pacifica Beach Coalition 
(PCB), dedicating herself to promoting conservation, stewardship, and 
restoration.
  Lynn began volunteering with the Pacifica Beach Coalition in 2002, 
working to clean up

and restore Pacificas beaches, coastlines, and habitats, ensuring our 
lands and communities thrive. Under Lynns leadership, PCB cleanups 
have been organized across the San Mateo County coastline, encouraging 
countless volunteers to take action in their communities. Her 
commitment to preserving our ocean, coastal habitats, and wildlife has 
made an immensely positive impact along our coastlines.
  Her spark ignited the passion for public service in countless 
community members. Since 2005, she has increased participation in the 
annual Earth Day of Action from 150 to 8,500 volunteers, expanding the 
events coverage in the city of Pacifica. She has also increased the 
number of field education events by tenfold.
  Lynn has been particularly devoted to engaging our communitys young 
people. She has held countless events in elementary schools across the 
region and developed Pacificas ``Junior Ocean Stewards Program, 
which engages children from underserved communities in environmental 
stewardship and service from a young age.
  Lynns leadership is responsible for PBCs immense growth and impact. 
She has worked with corporate volunteer teams, coordinated programming, 
worked with local media, and advocated for crucial conservation 
policies. She has also formed naturalist and habitat restoration 
programs, which have evolved into core staples of PBCs programming.
  In addition to her work in the PBC, Lynn has helped lead the Pacifica 
Land Trust as the Stewardship Coordinator, where she established a 
volunteer-based stewardship program with almost 1,000 volunteers. She 
has coordinated conservation efforts and developed programs that foster 
the appreciation, protection, and conservation of my districts natural 
habitats.
  Lynns dedication to her work inspires us all. Her time as President 
of the Pacifica Beach Coalition has transformed conservation efforts 
along my districts coasts. She leaves a legacy of stewardship and 
service. Both our community and our natural world owe her a debt of 
gratitude.
I rise today to honor Mr. Chris R. Sheridan, 
Jr., a distinguished leader in our community and the recipient of the 
Distinguished Citizen Award from the Central Georgia Council of 
Scouting America. Mr. Sheridans lifelong dedication to civic 
engagement and educational advancement reflects the values we cherish 
in our society. An event to celebrate his contributions to his 
community and serving others was held on September 25th 2025, at 6:00 
pm at the Anderson Conference Center in Macon, Georgia.
  As an Eagle Scout, Mr. Sheridan embodies the principles of 
leadership, service, and commitment. His influence is clear through his 
extensive board service on organizations like Mercer University, 
NewTown Macon, the Grand Opera House, The Lewis Foundation, The Phil 
and Alice Sheridan Foundation, The Ocmlugee National Park Initiative, 
Comp Trust Captive Insurance Company, the Navicent Health Foundation 
and the Macon Rescue Mission. His contributions have profoundly 
impacted our community, demonstrating a steadfast commitment to 
improving the lives of those around him.
  In recognition of his outstanding contributions to Central Georgia, 
, including the R. Kirby Godsey 
Leadership Award, Alumnus of the Year from Mount De Sales Academy, the 
Legacy of Leadership Award from Middle Georgia State University 
Foundation, the Sir Award from the Associated General Contractors of 
Georgia, the Meritorious Service Award from Mercer University, Person 
of the Year from Family Advancement Ministries, Citizen of the Year 
from the Greater Macon Chamber of Commerce and the Bishop Gartland 
Award from the Roman Catholic Diocese of Savannah. These honors reflect 
not only his achievements but also the respect he has garnered from 
peers and community members alike.
a shining example of what it means to serve. It has 
been said that ``service is the rent that we pay for the space that we 
occupy here on this earth. Mr. Sheridan has paid his rent, and he has 
paid it well.
, I ask my colleagues to join my wife Vivian and me, along 
with the 765,000 people of Georgias 2nd Congressional District in 
honoring Mr. Chris R. Sheridan for his service to his community, and 
all of humankind. May God continue to bless him and his family as he 
continues on his journey to making the world a better place to live for 
all people.
it is my great honor to rise in 
recognition of the distinct achievements and serviceable contributions 
of the Quakertown West End Fire Company No. 2, on this occasion of 
their 100th anniversary as of September 25, 2025. For a century, the 
men and women of the West End Fire Company No. 2 have served Upper 
Bucks County, Pennsylvania, with distinction, dedication, resilience, 
and valor.
  West End Fire Company No. 2 is known as Bucks County Station No. 18 
and has been completely staffed by volunteers since its formation in 
1925.
  Their unwavering dedication to continued training and willingness to 
serve their neighbors to meet the needs of the ever-changing fire 
service landscape is no better demonstrated than in their daily quick 
response to all types of emergencies.
  Station No. 18 has modern fire equipment and is constantly adding to 
its services. As expected, they have the most modern Fire Suppression 
equipment, Heavy Rescue equipment, and Water Rescue equipment.
  The West End Fire Company No. 2 is a sister Company to Quakertown 
Fire Company No. 1, which both operate as the Quakertown Fire 
Department.
  Throughout its long history, Station No. 18 has embodied the core 
values of: Integrity First, Service Before Self, and Excellence in All 
We Do. They have safeguarded the Community, provided critical support 
in times of need, and stood ready to respond when called upon. Their 
knowledge and skills, and superior operational support personnel, have 
been, and continue to be, some of the most skilled and dedicated in the 
fire service.
  As we celebrate this historic milestone, it is my distinct honor to 
celeberate those who faithfully served in the West End Fire Company No. 
2 over the past century. Their sacrifices of their time and those of 
their families have ensured our fire safe security. It is with deep 
gratitude that we acknowledge their service and pay tribute to their 
bravery.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in commemorating the 
100th anniversary of the West End Fire Company No. 2, Quakertown, 
Pennsylvania, in extending a heartfelt thank you to the men and women 
who have served, and continue to serve, in this distinguished Fire 
Company. May the next 100 years of Firefighters serve with the same 
valor, honor, dignity, and dedication to duty as the exemplary men and 
women of the West End Fire Co. No. 2 have so expertly demonstrated over 
the last century of service.
I rise today to honor the exceptional 
dedication and service of legendary coach Phil Robbins, a dedicated 
football coach in Southwest Virginia who helped build legacies across 
the district.
  As a student-athlete, Coach Robbins played both college football and 
baseball at Emory &amp; Henry College. His time at Emory &amp; Henry made an 
impression on him to continue in the world of sports as a leader, 
mentor, and coach.
  His coaching career started as an assistant coach at Washington 
Countys Patrick Henry High School for four years. In 1971, Coach 
Robbins took over the football program at John Battle High School in 
Washington County.
  Later in 1977, Coach Robbins led Christiansburg High School in 
Montgomery County. He helped lead the Blue Demons to the programs 
first playoff game in 1981.
  Coach Robbins then went to Powell Valley High School in Wise County, 
where he would build a strong foundation for a storied football program 
that achieved monumental success. From 1983 until the schools final 
football season in the fall of 2010, Coach Robbins helped Powell Valley 
claim seven state titles. During that time frame, his teams accumulated 
more than 260 wins.
  According to Tim Hayes of the Bristol Herald Courier, the 1998 Powell 
Valley team under Coach Robbins is considered by many as the best prep 
football squad to play in the coalfields of Southwest Virginia.
  His coaching not only produced NFL running backs Thomas Jones and 
Julius Jones, but countless college standouts over the course of his 
career and many who followed in his coaching footsteps. Coach Robbins 
contributed to other programs, including Powell Valleys track and 
field program. Under his tenure, Powell Valleys track and field team 
produced two state titles.
  After his tenure with Powell Valley, Coach Robbins remained in the 
coaching community. He spent the past few years helping with the 
football team at the University of Virginias College at Wise.
  Southwest Virginia communities appreciated all the hard work and 
dedication that Coach Robbins put into the development of student-
athletes in the region. Last year, the Phil Robbins Field was 
christened at Wise Countys Bullitt Park, where Union High School plays 
its football games. With this, we honor Coach Robbins in the most 
memorable way. Players and coaches should be inspired by his legacy, 
defined by a deep personal calling to coaching and athletics in 
communities across Southwest Virginia.
I rise today to honor the life of a 
remarkable man, Gus Butchikas, who passed away on September 21, 2025, 
after a courageous battle with cancer. Gus was a beloved member of our 
community, a devoted husband and father, and a cherished friend to 
many, including myself.
  Born into the legacy of Angelos Steak Pit, Gus dedicated himself to 
preserving and enhancing the family business, ensuring that it remained 
a cornerstone of Panama City Beach. His culinary talents were evident 
in the creation of signature recipes, including the renowned Greek 
dressing, which continues to be prepared exclusively by family members. 
Beyond his professional achievements, Gus was known for his deep faith, 
kindness, and unwavering commitment to his community.
  As a trusted confidant to governors, political leaders, and public 
servants, Gus played a pivotal role in guiding many of us in our public 
service journeys. His wisdom, encouragement, and genuine care for 
others left an indelible mark on all who had the privilege of knowing 
him.
  In this time of sorrow, our thoughts and prayers are with Patti, 
Angelo, Brittany, Evey, and the entire Butchikas family. May they find 
comfort in the knowledge that Gus was called home to the Lord, where 
his spirit will continue to shine brightly.
  May he rest in peace. His legacy lives on in all of us.
HONORING THE LIFE AND LEGACY OF H.E. CHRISTIAN ``CHRIS PEEPLES
I rise today to honor the life and legacy 
of H.E. Christian ``Chris Peeples, a dedicated public servant and 
tireless advocate for public transit whose decades of service improved 
the lives of countless residents in the East Bay and beyond.
  Chris Peeples was first appointed to the AC Transit Board of 
Directors in November 1997 to fill one of the Districts two At-Large 
Board positions. He went on to earn the trust of voters time and again, 
being elected in 1998 and re-elected in 2000, 2004, 2008, 2012, 2016, 
and 2020. Over the course of his distinguished tenure, he represented 
Ward 1--including Albany, El Cerrito, El Sobrante, Richmond, San Pablo, 
and the surrounding unincorporated communities--with energy, vision, 
and compassion.
  A longtime champion for transit riders, Director Peeples was deeply 
engaged in the AC Bus Riders Union, Alliance for AC Transit, Regional 
Alliance for Transit, Alliance for Sensible Transit, and the Coalition 
for a One Stop Terminal, among many other groups. His commitment 
extended beyond the Bay Area, as he actively participated in the 
Transportation Research Board of the National Academies and the 
American Public Transportation Association, where he elevated local 
priorities to national and international conversations.
  Director Peeples was especially devoted to advancing clean 
transportation and was a strong proponent of AC Transits 
groundbreaking zero-emission fuel cell bus program. He spoke at and 
moderated panels across the country and abroad, promoting hydrogen and 
zero-emission transit as solutions to climate change and air pollution.
  Chris was also a pillar of civic life, serving on the Oakland Ethics 
Commission and numerous community and political bodies. A graduate of 
Crown College, University of California at Santa Cruz, and Hastings 
College of the Law, he combined his intellectual rigor with a passion 
for equity and sustainability.
  Christian Peeples leaves behind a legacy of advocacy, innovation, and 
public service that will endure for generations. I ask my colleagues to 
join me in honoring his extraordinary life and in extending our deepest 
condolences to his family, friends, colleagues, and the community he 
served so faithfully.
HONORING THE REMARKABLE LIFE AND LEGACY OF ALBERT J. ``AL LLORENS
today I rise to honor the remarkable 
life and legacy of my good friend, Albert J. ``Al Llorens.
  Born and raised in Chicago, Al grew up in Englewood on the Southwest 
side and attended Chicago Public Schools. He went on to earn his 
bachelors degree in mathematics education from the University of 
Illinois at Champaign and later a masters degree in curriculum and 
instruction from National Louis University.
  Al was, above all, a good man. He believed deeply that making the 
world a better place begins in the classroom. For more than 30 years, 
he poured his heart into teaching mathematics and coaching at the high 
school level. He loved the classroom and dedicated himself to 
empowering the next generation of students.
  But Als impact reached far beyond the walls of any classroom. Even 
when he stepped away from teaching--always calling it a ``leave of 
absence rather than a retirement--he carried his passion for students 
into his work with the Illinois Education Association. Before being 
elected IEA president in 2023, Al served two terms each as vice 
president and secretary/treasurer, working tirelessly to address the 
teacher shortage crisis in Illinois and to ensure that every student 
had access to a higher quality education. As president of the IEA, he 
was a giant in education, fighting for his beloved teachers and 
students until the very end. Al dedicated his life to strengthening 
public education as he believed deeply in its power to transform 
communities, leaving a legacy that will continue to change the lives of 
many.
  I will miss Al not only for what he accomplished, but for how he 
carried himself. He was a friend to all, a leader who combined 
compassion with resolve, and a fierce advocate for public education.
, I extend my deepest condolences to his beloved wife, 
Wanda, his children, and his grandchildren. May they find comfort in 
knowing that Als lifes work continues in the generations of students 
and educators he inspired.
as the Member of Congress with the most 
Filipino Americans of any Congressional district nationwide (nearly 
200,000), I have been honored since 2019 to co-lead an annual 
resolution recognizing October as Filipino American History Month. I 
have joined many colleagues in doing so once again to recognize and 
celebrate the great contributions of Filipino Americans to our country, 
in government and law, music and entertainment, sports, business and 
countless other ventures.
  The first recorded arrival of Filipinos in the continental United 
States took place on October 18, 1587, when the ``Luzones Indios came 
ashore from the Manila-built galleon Nuestra Senora de Esperanza in 
Morro Bay, California. This was followed by the first permanent 
Filipino settlement in the United States in St. Malo, Louisiana in 
1763.
  Since those early beginnings, our Filipino American community has 
grown to nearly 5 million people and is the third largest Asian 
American and Pacific Islander group in the United States. Many of the 
early Filipino immigrants were young men who came to the United States, 
most to Hawaii, California, Washington, and Alaska, seeking a better 
life.
  This first generation of Filipino immigrants are commonly referred to 
as the ``Manong generation (Ilocano for first-born male). They worked 
mostly physically demanding jobs in tough conditions for very little 
pay. Over the years, they fought against discrimination, found a way 
forward, became respected members of their communities and made a 
better future for themselves and their future generations. Several 
generations have thrived upon that foundation.
  The history of the Fil-Am community in Hawaii is particularly rich 
and echoes the national story. In 1906, the first fifteen Sakada 
contract laborers arrived in Honolulu from the Philippines aboard the 
SS Doric, marking the first sustained immigration into our country and 
the humble beginnings of Fil-Ams in Hawaii. By 1919, more than 29,000 
Filipinos had traveled to Hawaii to take labor contracts. These first 
immigrants, those that followed and the subsequent generations 
eventually became trailblazers in politics and government, the 
military, business and entrepreneurship, journalism, popular culture, 
music and the arts and more.
  Our resolution honors the tremendous and increasing contribution of 
Filipino Americans to our country in all areas including music, dance, 
literature, education, health care, business, literature, journalism, 
sports, fashion, politics, government, science, technology, the fine 
arts and other fields. I include in the Record the names and 
accomplishments of Filipino Americans, again from my Hawaii:

       Domingo Los Banos was Hawaiis first Filipino American 
     school principal and a loyal veteran of the 1st Filipino 
     Infantry Regiment that fought in the Philippines during World 
     War II.
       Carolina Dizon Wong broke a glass ceiling when she obtained 
     an M.D. degree and became the first Filipino American to 
     start a medical practice in Hawaii in 1952.
       Peter Aduja became the first Filipino American elected to 
     public office in the United States when he was elected to the 
     Hawaii Territorial House of Representatives in 1954.
       Larry Ramos became to first Filipino and Asian-American to 
     win a Grammy Award playing the banjo for the New Christy 
     Minstrels in 1963.
       Benjamin Menor became the first Filipino American to serve 
     in a states highest judiciary office as a Justice of the 
     Hawaii State Supreme Court in 1974.
       In 1978 Alfred Laureta became the first Filipino American 
     to serve as a federal judge, serving in the federal court of 
     the Northern Mariana Islands.
       Ines Cayaban was the first Filipino American graduate of 
     the School of Public Health, Nursing and Social Work at the 
     University of Hawaii. She received the prestigious Jefferson 
     Award in 1986 for her service.
       In 1994, Ben Cayetano was elected the Governor of Hawaii, 
     becoming the first Filipino American governor of a state in 
     our union.
       In 2019, Roy Macaraeg became the first Filipino American to 
     become a general officer in the history of Hawaiis citizen 
     soldier ranks.

  In Hawaii, we also regularly honor the over 250,000 Filipinos 
nationwide who answered the call to protect and defend America and the 
Philippines in the Pacific theater. In 2016, President Obama signed 
into law the Filipino Veterans of World War II Congressional Gold Medal 
Act to bestow Congresss highest honor upon those veterans. With my 
colleagues in the House, I have introduced our Filipino Veterans Family 
Reunification Act, which seeks to reunite World War II Filipino 
soldiers with their children, so that we can honor those living in our 
community who fought to protect the free and open Indo-Pacific that we 
have today.
  Each and all these lives of achievement are but a small sampling of a 
broader community that has achieved so much and contributed so much to 
the rich fabric of our country. And the story of Filipino Americans is 
still in its early chapters.
  It is fully appropriate that we again honor our Filipino American 
community whose story is a quintessentially American story.
RECOGNIZING JOSEPH DRURY CONNER AS OHIOS 13TH CONGRESSIONAL DISTRICT 
                                of ohio
today, I rise to recognize Jackson High 
School Automotive Teacher Joseph Drury as Ohios 13th Congressional 
District Champion of the Week.
  Joseph was recently awarded a $50,000 prize for his schools skilled 
trades program as a winner of the 2025 Harbor Freight Tools for Schools 
Prize for Teaching Excellence. He is 1 of just 25 teachers around the 
country to be honored with this award--a true testament to his 
determination to better the lives of his students.
  This annual award was created to recognize excellence among high 
school skilled trades teachers, a group of educators that is frequently 
overlooked and underappreciated, yet so important to ensure that 
students have the tools to excel in a career in the trades.
  Inspired by his own experiences as a high school student, he told his 
automotive instructor on graduation day that he wanted to be a teacher 
one day, too. He has 15 years of industry experience in dealerships and 
six years as a bus mechanic for Jackson Local Schools. Joseph is most 
passionate about sharing his love for automobiles with students, seeing 
them grow more confident as they acquire the knowledge and skills to 
become self-sufficient with automotive operation and upkeep.
  By using real-world scenarios and hands-on projects, students gain 
practical experience with modern repair technologies, preparing them 
for future careers in the automotive industry. The Automotive 
Technology Program at Jackson High School prepares students to be high-
tech automotive technicians, move into advanced training within the 
industry, or earn an associate degree in the automotive technology 
field.
  Josephs students have a 95 percent job placement rate within six 
months of graduation, with many students employed at local auto shops, 
dealerships, or starting their own businesses. In the last 3 years, 
100% of students enrolled in Josephs automotive technology classes 
have graduated, and 85% of them have done so after earning one or more 
industry certifications. Thank you Joseph for doing this work to 
inspire the next generation of skilled mechanics.
  With this award, and all the hard work that came before it, Joseph is 
a shining example why Ohios 13th Congressional District is known as 
the ``Birthplace of Champions. He has certainly made Jackson High 
School and our greater community proud.
on behalf of my constituents at St. John the 
Baptist Greek Orthodox Church in Omaha, I would like to welcome their 
Spiritual Leader, the Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople, His All 
Holiness Bartholomew, to the United States. He is visiting the United 
States next week to meet with the president and members of the House 
and Senate Leadership and to receive the revered Templeton Prize.
  Known as the ``Green Patriarch, he is well known for his efforts to 
promote ecology and the protection of the environment. He has been at 
the forefront of religious freedom and bringing together others from 
many faiths to work towards better cooperation and understanding. 
Through dialogue and visitations, the Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew 
has significantly advanced Orthodox relations with the Roman Catholics, 
Lutherans, Baptists, and others through visitations and open dialogues.
  In addition, His All Holiness has visited several Orthodox Nations 
that were part of communist Eastern Europe to strengthen his contacts 
and relations with various Orthodox national churches there.
  The Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew has brought together Christians, 
Muslims, and Jews at international peace conferences and meetings to 
advance greater cooperation and mutual understanding. His efforts to 
promote mutual respect and religious tolerance included having 
theological conversations with Muslim and Jewish leaders.
  His push for peace includes calling out both the Russian state and 
the Russian church for the invasion of Ukraine. In Ecumenical Patriarch 
Bartholomews opinion, he says, ``This is the theology that the sister 
Church of Russia began to teach, trying to justify an unjust, unholy, 
unprovoked, diabolical war against a sovereign and independent 
country--Ukraine.
  The Ecumenical Patriarch is a figure who has addressed the European 
Parliament and the U.S. Congress (in 1997 when he received the 
Congressional Gold Medal), and has met Heads of State in Great Britain, 
Canada, South America, Greece, Russia, Norway, Finland, Serbia, 
Romania, Bulgaria, Albania, Ethiopia, Korea, and Cuba. As Ecumenical 
Patriarch (the only Christian Leader in the world who is considered 
equal to the Pope of Rome in honor), he has met with every Pontiff 
since John Paul II, including Leo XIV. He has also traveled to Libya, 
Syria, Egypt, Iran, Jordan, Azerbaijan, Qatar, and Bahrain, and met 
with both political and religious figures in those Islamic countries, 
many of whom no other Christian hierarch of such stature has ever 
visited.
  I welcome His All Holiness to the United States, and I congratulate 
him on his well-deserved honor.