I am grateful to recognize 
Watchmen Broadcasting on 30 years of ministry.
  In 1995, Dorothy and Russell Spaulding felt a calling to begin a 
Christian television station in Augusta, Georgia. Now, 30 years later 
they have transformed the ministry from broadcasting locally with 1,000 
watts of power to internationally with 150,000 watts of power, 
increasing potential viewership.
  It is through faith that the Spaulding family and Watchmen 
Broadcasting have helped tens of thousands of people reach Salvation 
and have prevented more than 8,000 suicides.
  Without the generosity of ministries like Perry Stone, Channel 55 in 
Orlando, and local Networks, Watchmen Broadcasting would not be the 
meaningful success it is today.
  The Spauldings are a true testament to faith; starting with less than 
one hundred dollars and a hotel room as an office, Dorothy and Russell 
have touched the lives of many.
  Their ministry continues to represent that God uses small beginnings 
for big impact.
  Best wishes and prayers for their continued success in faith and 
ministry as they continue to influence lives and follow the plan God 
has for them.
I rise today to commemorate the 
100th anniversary of the Des Plaines Theatre, a cherished landmark in 
the heart of Illinois arts community. For a century, the Des Plaines 
Theatre has brought people together through performance, film, and 
culture, serving as a vital space for artistic expression and civic 
engagement.
  Since its opening on August 9, 1925, the theatre has hosted hundreds 
of performances, welcomed countless community events, and stood as a 
gathering place for generations of Illinoisans. Over the years, it has 
transformed from a vaudeville stage to a movie house and now a fully 
restored performing arts center. It has endured a fire, undergone 
multiple renovations, and has emerged stronger each time, continuing to 
inspire new audiences.
  I am proud to congratulate the Des Plaines Theatre on its 100 years 
of achievement. Its legacy is a testament to the power of the arts to 
unite communities, celebrate local history, and enrich lives. I look 
forward to its continued contributions for many years to come.
I rise in strong opposition to H. Res. 
516, the Condemning the violent June 2025 riots in Los Angeles, 
California. It is deeply unfortunate that instead of working with 
Democrats on a bipartisan resolution to condemn violence, Republicans 
have instead written a partisan resolution designed to attack elected 
officials in California. Furthermore, the resolution fails to recognize 
the premature and escalatory deployment of the National Guard and 
active-duty Marines by President Trump to Los Angeles.
  When the House of Representatives passes a resolution regarding 
current events, it should do its due diligence to cite the facts. 
Unfortunately, it is clear the Republican majority had no interest in 
accurately portraying the protests in Los Angeles when they wrote H. 
Res. 516. Instead, the resolution perpetuates a false narrative about 
Democratic elected officials in California. H. Res. 516 states that 
local elected officials did not adequately respond to the bad actors 
and trouble-doers. These claims are patently false. Mayor Karen Bass of 
Los Angeles implemented a multi-day curfew and surged law enforcement 
resources to downtown Los Angeles to maintain control of the situation. 
This kept the situation contained to 10 blocks of the downtown area.
  But even when the Los Angeles Chief of Police stated that the 
demonstrations ``were nowhere near a level where the National Guard 
was needed, President Trump disregarded his opinion and took the 
escalatory action of deploying 2,000 members of the California National 
Guard to Los Angeles. Then, on June 10, the President deployed 700 
active-duty Marines. Our active-duty military has absolutely no legal 
role in domestic law enforcement. Los Angeles County has 17,000 law 
enforcement personnel who are well trained in crowd control. There was 
no need for the National Guard or the Marines to be deployed by the 
President, and his decision sets a dangerous precedent for the future.
  Republicans had the opportunity to bring a resolution introduced by 
my colleague, Representative Barragan, condemning violence and bad 
actors, and thanking local law enforcement for their work. Instead, 
Republicans chose to use the unrest in Los Angeles to play partisan 
games and attack Democrats in California.
, it is our duty as public servants to tell the truth. We 
should all stand for condemning violence, de-escalation of force, and 
the right to peacefully protest. It is unfortunate that this resolution 
walks away from these principles. I cannot support it.
I am pleased to recognize Cheyenne Peckne, 
a 911 operator whose instructions helped coach a wife to give CPR to 
her husband who had suffered a heart attack.
  An often-overlooked role in the first responder community is that of 
our 911 operators. While not as visible as other first responders, they 
are the first line of contact and convene the proper authorities during 
an emergency. They receive calls from distressed individuals and have 
to act fast with limited information.
  Cheyenne is an 18-year-old from York, PA, who started her role as a 
911 operator only a few weeks ago. On May 8, 2025, the Red Lion Area 
Ambulance Association and Laurel Fire Company received a call for a 
health emergency. Cheyenne picked up the call, and on the other end, a 
woman whose husband had suffered a cardiac arrest.
  Over the next few minutes, Cheyenne comforted the women and assured 
her that help was on the way. Cheyenne then began to instruct the women 
on how to give CPR to her husband. This would continue until first 
responders were able to reach the home and transport the man to the 
hospital. While this interaction only took a few minutes, it was 
crucial to saving the mans life.
  In a reception a few weeks after the incident, Cheyenne had the 
opportunity to meet the family and be recognized for her actions. She 
stated, ``The wife did an amazing job. . . she is the one who saved her 
husband.
  I thank Cheyenne for her remarkable work and commitment to serving 
the public in this role. We can take comfort in knowing that she will 
continue to help members of our community in times of crisis.
I rise today to honor and recognize Mr. 
.
  Although his education, military service and extensive career took 
him all over, Mr. Jameson, has remained a lifelong resident of Culpeper 
and still lives across the street from his childhood home.
  He began his journey at George Washington Carver Regional High 
School, where he and many other African American students from 
Culpeper, Orange, Madison, and Rappahannock counties were educated 
during segregation.
  He went on to attend Virginia Union University before transferring to 
Virginia Commonwealth University, where he earned his degree in 1970 in 
pursuit of his lifelong dream of becoming a teacher. However, before he 
could begin his teaching career, Mr. Jameson was drafted into the U.S. 
Army and deployed to Vietnam, where he served with honor and 
distinction. He received advanced artillery training and was awarded 
for his courage and three Bronze Star Medals, a Purple Heart, and two 
Army Commendation Medals.
  Before returning home, he joined his father, Saint Jameson, in the 
construction business. When his father retired, Charles took over his 
role, eventually rising to the position of Project Superintendent and 
later construction manager. After nearly four decades in the field, he 
retired in 2010.
  In retirement, Mr. Jameson redirected his time and energy into 
meaningful community service, becoming a driving force behind numerous 
local initiatives. He worked closely with fellow Carver High School 
alumni on scholarship programs, served on the boards of the Carver 4-
County Museum and the Museum of Culpeper History, and played an active 
role in organizations such as the Carver Agriculture Research Board, 
the Culpeper Minutemen, the National Association for the Advancement of 
Colored People (NAACP), and the Veterans of Foreign Wars (VFW).
  He also holds a leadership position in the local chapter of the Sons 
of the American Revolution, where he helps organize Culpepers annual 
July 4th Patriotic Presentation--an event that honors the regions rich 
historical legacy. His extensive service and leadership have earned him 
numerous accolades, including the Culpeper Colonel Award, the MLK 
Dreamkeeper Award, Aging Togethers 5 Over 50 Award, the NAACP Activism 
Award, and the Neighborhood Watch Amazing Citizen Award.
  I want to personally thank Mr. Jameson for his lifelong dedication to 
service, education, and the preservation of our shared history. Today, 
he continues that legacy by focusing on his extensive research into 
African American participation in the Revolutionary War.
, I ask that you and my colleagues join me in recognizing 
an extraordinary citizen in my district, Mr. Charles Jameson, for his 
unwavering commitment to our community.
I rise today to honor the 40th Anniversary of 
Luso-American Development Foundation (FLAD). The strengthening historic 
alliance between Portugal and the United States led to the creation of 
FLAD in 1985. Its purpose at the time was to strengthen the 
relationship between our two countries through cultural exchanges and 
societal transatlantic relationships.
  In 1983, the United States and Portugal formed a Cooperation and 
Defense Agreement. This agreement piloted the establishment of FLAD.
  This year FLAD also celebrates its ninth edition of the FLAD 
Legislators Dialogue, which brings together United States lawmakers of 
Portuguese ancestry with Portuguese leaders in Lisbon to foster 
powerful discussions on the strongest path forward to build relations 
and strengthen our collective security.
  FLAD supports the work of Portuguese and Portuguese American 
students, researchers, scientists, and teachers at the forefront of 
science, while also facilitating contacts and collaborations with 
renowned U.S. institutions to build bridges between our two countries 
and establish new partnerships and possibilities for all generations.
  FLADs work also supports visiting professors at prestigious U.S. 
universities, such as Fresno State University, Brown University, 
Georgetown University, and University of Massachusetts Lowell to teach 
Portuguese Studies with the hopes of increasing Portuguese speakers in 
the United States. FLAD has been highly successful in promoting 
internships for American students and facilitating their participation 
in programs in Portugal.
  FLAD has been a principal supporter of Portuguese art and culture by 
collaborating on numerous initiatives that preserve the presence of 
Portuguese culture in the United States, allowing exchanges between 
artists, intellectuals and researchers of the two countries. FLADs 
contemporary art collection includes about 1000 works of art from 
Portuguese artists.
  FLAD has continuously partnered with the California Portuguese 
American Coalition (CPAC) in supporting Portuguese advocacy within 
California communities. These local communities helped shape the 
American culture and the economic growth throughout Californias 
Central Valley and nationwide.
, as proud descendants of Portuguese immigrants, with the 
traditions and values from the Azores Islands never far from our 
hearts, I ask that our colleagues join us in celebrating the 40th 
anniversary of FLAD and recognizing the contributions of FLAD to U.S.-
Portugal relations.
I rise today to introduce the Native 
American Tourism and Improving Visitor Experience (NATIVE) Act 
Amendments.
  This bill is the House companion to S. 612, introduced by Senators 
Lisa Murkowski, Chairman of the Senate Indian Affairs Committee, and 
Brian Schatz, Vice Chairman of the Committee. The bill makes important 
technical corrections to the NATIVE Act to authorize grants to Indian 
Tribes, Tribal organizations, Native Alaskans and Native Hawaiian 
organizations for recreational travel and tourism activities.
  In 2016, Congress enacted the NATIVE Act to provide grants, loans and 
technical assistance to Indian Tribes, Tribal organizations, Native 
Alaskans and Native Hawaiian organizations to assist in developing 
tourism in indigenous peoples communities and enhancing opportunities 
for visitors to learn about indigenous peoples history, cultures, 
traditional foods, languages and arts. Unfortunately, the act did not 
clearly authorize the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) or the Office of 
Native Hawaiian Relations (ONHR) to issue the grants, which led to 
implementation challenges.
  Our bill corrects this issue by clearly authorizing the BIA and ONHR, 
along with several other federal agencies, to issue these grants and 
authorize appropriations for the program. The bill will enable improved 
access to federal resources, helping these communities build 
sustainable tourism infrastructure and expand cultural tourism. In 
turn, it will create jobs and boost economic development in rural and 
underserved areas.
  This bill is especially important for my home state of Hawaii, where 
the link between tourism and our indigenous people, Native Hawaiians, 
is essential. Native Hawaiian culture is at the heart of our islands 
uniqueness and one of the major draws for those who visit our state.
  The past generations have witnessed a great renaissance of the 
Hawaiian language and culture, and in turn over the ensuing years 
Native Hawaiian practitioners and culture have become an increasingly 
visible and central part of our visitor industry. We in Hawaii are 
committed to fostering this sector of our economy in a way that 
encourages long-term cultural preservation efforts.
  Through improving the implementation of the NATIVE Act, which has 
helped both Native Hawaiian Organizations and local Native Hawaiian 
businesses, our federal government will do a better job preserving and 
promoting Native Hawaiian culture. We can help connect tourists with 
the rich indigenous heritage of Hawaii though community-based visitor 
experiences that protect cultural sites, promote education and create 
jobs.
  By enacting the NATIVE Act Amendments, what we have achieved in 
Hawaii can grow and be replicated nationwide. I urge my colleagues to 
join with us to support this critical initiative to empower native 
communities, enhance the tourism sector and create lasting economic 
opportunities.
  Mahalo.
I rise, today to pay tribute to 
Kentucky journalist Bill Estep, who is retiring from the Lexington 
Herald Leader after 40 years of dedicated news and investigative 
reporting in the Commonwealth of Kentucky.
  As a resident of Somerset, Kentucky, Bill is one of my constituents, 
giving him personal insight into the generational challenges that we 
have faced in Kentuckys Appalachian region. He has written about our 
coal mines, our education system, historic flooding and tornado 
disasters, while also holding elected leaders accountable in the 
courtroom of public opinion, and never failing to keep facts at the 
core of his journalistic integrity. With the uprising of ``yellow 
journalism in the form of social medias sensational opinions and 
unchecked rumors, 24-hours a day, Bill has remained consistent in his 
news coverage, keeping his pen steady, balanced, fair and accurate.
  Over the last four decades, Bill and I have sat down together to talk 
about every issue that impacts the people of southern and eastern 
Kentucky. We built a trusted relationship with the understanding that 
we both had an important job to do, requiring tough questions and, at 
times, tough answers. In 2003, Bill embarked on an investigative series 
called ``Prescription for Pain that would prove to have a monumental 
impact on my public service. The series exposed a rapidly growing 
opioid epidemic more than 20 years ago that was spreading like wildfire 
throughout our small communities, taking the lives of high school 
beauty queens and local leaders alike, while revealing local corruption 
and criminal drug trafficking in the depths of our mountain 
communities. His collective work inspired me to not only respond, but 
to take action. In the following weeks, I called together a group of 
leaders from across our region to launch a non-profit organization 
called Operation UNITE--Unlawful Narcotics Investigations, Treatment 
and Education--the Nations first multi-pronged approach to help save 
lives and curb the drug crisis. In 2012, Operation UNITE took its 
mission to the national stage by establishing the National Rx and 
Illicit Drug Summit, which has grown into the largest convention of its 
kind with more than 3,000 annual attendees and highlighted by keynote 
speakers from federal agencies across the country, including four U.S. 
Presidents. Bills reporting inspired a life-saving movement in Eastern 
Kentucky that is now impacting collaborative efforts nationwide--a feat 
worthy of a Pulitzer Prize and more.
  In 2013, when the downturn of the coal industry was exacerbated by 
the Obama Administrations war on coal, we lost more than 12,000 coal 
mining jobs in Eastern Kentucky alone. Once again, turning to action 
rather than words, former Governor Steve Beshear and I co-founded a 
bipartisan initiative called SOAR--Shaping Our Appalachian Region--to 
reimagine the future of southern and eastern Kentucky. Since inception, 
SOAR has focused on expanding access to high performance broadband, 
more diversified industrial development, workforce training, innovative 
tourism

projects, expanded health care opportunities and much more. With the 
formation of SOAR, Bill Estep showed up once again with his iconic 
yellow notepad and a recorder to get the story right. From day one, he 
made sure there was an entire section in the Herald Leader featuring 
the work of SOAR, and he has remained committed to following our 
progress, our goals and our challenges.
  Throughout his career, it has been clear when Bill used his opinion 
in an effective way, advocating for a larger spread in the urban 
Lexington-based statewide newspaper to help feature stories in Eastern 
Kentucky that the rest of the state should care about. I imagine that 
he didnt win every battle with his editors over the years, but I know 
that Bill believed in the value of southern and eastern Kentucky for 
the rest of the Commonwealth. He was bold to ask tough questions, 
patient enough to listen to the response, and determined to conduct 
necessary research before writing a story. Upcoming and current 
reporters should take notes from Bill, and proceed with unbiased 
questions, an open mind, and a relentless dedication to facts over 
opinions and click-bait.
  Our rural Appalachian region has largely remained in the shadows of 
Kentuckys bigger cities, playing the national medias role of the 
impoverished, forgotten people who need a savior. Thanks to courageous 
journalists like Bill, we have had the opportunity to fight the 
stereotypes and tell the real story taking place in Eastern Kentucky, 
where resilient and innovative people are stepping up to shape a 
brighter future for the next generation through aerospace, medical 
science, engineering and much more. As Bill begins a new chapter of 
retirement to focus on his familys story and new traveling adventures, 
I hope it is filled with great pride in the work he has accomplished 
and the light of hope that he has helped shine on Eastern Kentucky.
I rise today to recognize Avi Bender of 
Arvada, Colorado. Avi was selected as one of 250 high school students 
across the country to participate in the Department of States 
prestigious Congress-Bundestag Youth Exchange (CBYX) Program.
  Launched in 1983, CBYX selects high achieving youth from both Germany 
and the United States to live in each others country for one academic 
year. During their year abroad, students will foster meaningful 
relationships between America and Germany, while giving participants 
new perspectives on peoples and cultures beyond their own. Many CBYX 
alumni go on to distinguished careers in foreign affairs and public 
service using the language skills gained through this scholarship 
program.
  This year, Avi will travel to Germany to attend school, live with a 
host family, and collaborate with the Department of State to promote 
cultural exchange between Americans and the German people.
  On behalf of the people of Colorados Seventh Congressional District, 
it is my honor to congratulate Avi Bender for this impressive 
accomplishment and wish Avi all the best for this upcoming year in 
Germany.
I rise today to ask my colleagues to join 
me in congratulating Hannah Davis. Hannah is a member of Girl Scouts of 
Michigan Shore to Shore, Girl Scout Juliette. She has exemplified 
extraordinary leadership, innovative problem-solving, and a 
demonstrated commitment to making a lasting, positive impact by earning 
the most prestigious award in Girl Scouting, the Gold Award.
  Gold Award Girl Scouts are recognized as trailblazers who are willing 
to tackle the most pressing challenges facing their communities and the 
world with measurable, sustainable, and far-reaching results. To earn 
the Girl Scout Gold Award, high school-age Girl Scouts must identify 
and investigate an issue they care about, devise a plan, and then lead 
a team of experts and community members to implement a project that 
produces lasting change. Over the course of 1 to 2 years, Gold Award 
Girl Scouts demonstrate significant initiative, commitment, and 
leadership, distinguishing them from their peers. Through their 
resourcefulness and perseverance, they embody the Girl Scout Law to 
truly make the world a better place.
  Hannahs project, ``Community Sensory Room, in partnership with 
Faith Community Church of Coopersville, has greatly improved 
accessibility resources for individuals with autism, Sensory Processing 
Disorder (SPD), Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD), and 
Attention Deficit Disorder (ADD). Hannah took action by creating a 
sensory room at her local church, allowing families and children space 
to stimulate, engage, or relax senses, which will have a positive 
impact on our community for years to come.
  On behalf of Michigans 3rd Congressional District, I congratulate 
Hannah Davis for achieving the highest distinction in Girl Scouts, the 
Gold Award. I thank Hannah for her leadership and for making such a 
positive, enduring change in our community.
I rise today to recognize the 81st Convention 
of the Kappa Alpha Order, which will be held in Roanoke, the heart of 
Virginias Sixth District. It is a distinct honor to welcome this 
historic brotherhood back to its roots. Kappa Alpha Order was founded 
on December 21, 1865, in a small room at Washington College, now 
Washington and Lee University, in Lexington, Virginia.
  What began as a bond of friendship has grown into a nationwide 
organization that continues to promote leadership, service, and

moral integrity. The Orders motto, ``Dieu et les Dames, meaning God 
and the Ladies, reflects its core values. For over 150 years, its 
members have committed themselves to cultivating character and serving 
their communities with distinction.
  Today, KAs across the country continue to make a meaningful impact 
through ongoing charitable work, campus leadership, and a lifelong 
commitment to honor and duty. The Orders presence in our local 
community is a point of pride, and I applaud their continued 
contributions to the betterment of our society.
I rise today to recognize and commend 
, Texas, for a lifetime of devoted 
service to our nation, The Great State of Texas, and his local 
community.
1981, where he trained and served as a 
Nuclear Weapons Specialist. Over the course of an honorable 22-year 
military career, he rose to the rank of Senior Master Sergeant, 
exemplifying leadership, integrity, and an unwavering commitment to the 
security of our country. He retired from active duty in 2003, but his 
public service was far from over.
  Immediately upon retirement, Mr. Fletcher began his second career in 
direct service to the people of Cooke County as the Emergency Manager 
and Fire Marshal. In this role, which he held for an additional 22 
years, he became a cornerstone of public safety and emergency 
preparedness in North Texas. Mr. Fletcher led Cooke County through 
seven federally declared disasters, investigated over 400 fires, and 
oversaw numerous other critical incidents that required his seasoned 
judgment and calm leadership. Among his many accomplishments, Mr. 
Fletcher was instrumental in coordinating the Individual Safe Room 
Grant Program, a vital initiative that led to the installation of 425 
storm shelters across Cooke County. His foresight and dedication 
undoubtedly made Cooke County a safer place for all who call it home.
, Mr. Ray Fletchers contributions to his country and 
community reflect the very best of American values. I am proud to 
represent such a distinguished citizen in the 26th Congressional 
District of Texas. On behalf of a grateful community, I thank him for 
his selfless service and wish him continued happiness in his well-
earned retirement.
RECOGNIZING THE SHERIFFS OFFICE AND EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES OF CLAY 
                           of north carolina
I rise today to recognize the Sheriffs 
Office and Emergency Medical Services of Clay County.
  On September 27, 2024, Hurricane Helene slammed into Western North 
Carolina, leaving a trail of devastation and destruction. While Clay 
County was largely spared from the storms most severe effects, its 
first responders did not return to business as usual the following day. 
Instead, the Clay County Sheriffs Office and Emergency Medical 
Services immediately sprang into action to assist counties in desperate 
need.
  This spirit of service is what makes Western North Carolina truly 
special. It is exemplified by neighbors showing up in times of crisis, 
ready to lend a helping hand and stand together during the darkest of 
days. The Clay County Sheriffs Office deployed officers and resources 
to Haywood, Buncombe, Avery, and Mitchell counties, providing critical 
manpower and support to these Helene-affected areas. At the same time, 
Clay County Emergency Medical Services coordinated efforts to deliver 
much-needed medical personnel and essential supplies to communities in 
need.

  The Clay County Sheriffs Office and Emergency Medical Services were 
flooded with donated supplies from area churches, local businesses, and 
citizens. Once transported to the affected areas, these supplies were 
received by first responders with great relief and deep appreciation. 
Let it be recognized and remembered that, in a time of great need, Clay 
County stood tall--not only for its own residents, but for its 
neighbors across the region.
it is with a heavy heart, and fond 
remembrance, that I rise today to honor an impressive insurance 
professional, prodigious athlete, iconic golf promoter and friend of 
long standing, Mr. Willie J. Watkins, I. Sadly, Willie transitioned 
from labor to reward on June 21, 2025. A Homegoing Celebration will be 
held at 11:00 am on Thursday,

July 3, 2025, at Macedonia Christian Ministries, 3645 Cusseta Road in 
Columbus Georgia.
  Willie James Watkins, I was born Feb 17, 1952, in Columbus, Georgia 
to the late Jessie Watkins and Susie Grant Watkins. One of seven 
children, Willie grew up in the Booker T. Washington Apartments, 
attended 2nd Avenue and 5th Avenue Elementary Schools, Marshall Junior 
High School and graduated from the William H. Spencer High School in 
1970. He was affectionately known as ``Mr. Loquacious. Willie was a 
staunch supporter of the William H. Spencer High School Alumni 
Association and the Class of 1970 and never missed the activities 
surrounding the Spencer-Carver sports rivalry events.
  Throughout his elementary and secondary education, Willie excelled in 
athletics. He played baseball, basketball, and ran track for the 
William H. Spencer Greenwaves. At the age of 10, he started to caddy at 
the Columbus Lions Club Golf Course on Victory Drive where he learned 
to play and developed a life-long love of the game of golf.
  Upon graduating from high school, Willie attended Morristown College 
in Tennessee on a basketball scholarship. He later served in the United 
States Army and following his discharge returned home to Columbus and 
entered the insurance profession as a salesman with Life of Georgia 
Insurance Company and Interstate Insurance company. He became a life 
underwriter and instructor, teaching classes to prepare countless 
insurance professionals for certification and licensure.
  With his life-long friend from BTW Apartments, Jerome Humphries, golf 
became a passion. Watching legendary African-American golfers such as 
Charlie Sifford, Jim Thorpe, Pete Brown, Jim Dent and Bobby Stroble, as 
caddies on the segregated ``Chitlin golf circuit, they developed 
skills and ultimately competed professionally on the all black North 
American Golf Association Tour, traveling through Georgia, Alabama, 
Florida, North Carolina and South Carolina. They also competed locally 
in the WOKS Pro-Am Golf Classic, the Purple and Gold Pro-Am Golf 
Classic and the Victory Drive Golf Classic. Moreover, Willie Watkins 
and Jerome Humphries founded the Metro Columbus Golf Association in 
1987 and promoted charity golf tournaments in support of sickle cell 
and epilepsy research for the benefit of humanity.
  While Willie was well-known for his loquacious personality and 
sometimes boisterous demeanor, he was a man of deep faith and was an 
active member of the Fourth Street Missionary Baptist Church from 
childhood up through the remainder of his life.
  On a personal note, Willie was my friend for over 30 years. He was 
invaluable in his support of the Annual Sanford Bishop Golf Classic for 
27 years in both Albany and Columbus. His extraordinary volunteer 
service contributed mightily to its enduring success. Often Willie and 
Jerome Humphries traveled with me to play in numerous charity golf 
tournaments. It was my honor for him to join me in traveling to Augusta 
National to witness the 2018 Masters which we enjoyed immensely. I 
will be forever grateful for his friendship and support.
  Willie accomplished much in his life but none of it would have been 
possible without the grace of God and the love and support of his late 
wife, Patricia D. Watkins; his four children, Marcus Watkins, Willena 
Watkins Singleton, Mactrice Watkins Thomas and Willie Watkins, Jr.; his 
late siblings, Lily Watkins Hopson, Catherine Watkins Jackson, Frank 
Watkins and Geneva Watkins Burns; his surviving siblings, Ann Watkins 
Cobb and Jessie Watkins, Jr.; his 8 grandchildren, 2 great-
grandchildren; nieces, nephews, and extended family. Willie loved his 
family, and his family loved him back.
  As we reflect on the remarkable life of Willie James Watkins, we 
honor and remember his unwavering faith, his love of family, his help 
to insurance professionals, his Spencer Greenwave spirit, his passion 
for golf and his impact on our community. We are all better because 
Willie touched our lives.
, I ask my colleagues to join my wife, Vivian, and me, 
along with the more than 765,000 people of Georgias 2nd Congressional 
District in honoring the life and legacy of Mr. Willie James Watkins, 
in extending our deepest condolences to his family, friends and all who 
mourn his loss. Moreover, I pray that we will all be consoled and 
comforted by an abiding faith and the Holy Spirit in the days, weeks 
and months ahead.