I was unavoidably detained. Had I 
been present, I would have voted YEA on Roll Call No. 132, and YEA on 
Roll Call No. 133.
I rise today to recognize the outstanding 
contributions that Pricilla Cruz-Seado has made to our community 
through her work with New Beginnings Youth Shelter, which serves 
homeless kids aged 10-17 who are between foster homes, abandoned, or 
homeless. The whole team jumps in to take care of the kids that have no 
one else looking out for them. They teach kids structure, respect, 
understanding and so much more in a loving environment. The team really 
cares, and each member is deeply invested in the kids long-term 
success.
  It is clear Pricilla Cruz-Seado has made a profoundly positive impact 
on our community, and I am grateful for her service. May we all strive 
to serve our communities with the same dedication and humility.
I rise today in solemn remembrance of 
those brave men and women who gave the ultimate sacrifice in defense of 
the United States of America. On behalf of the United States Congress, 
and the constituents of the 23rd Congressional District, I am proud to 
recognize our brave service members courage, sacrifice, and valor as 
we come together this Memorial Day.
  All gave some, and some gave all. Memorial Day is more than a long 
weekend--it is sacred time for a grateful Nation to reflect on the cost 
of liberty. We owe our freedom to those who answered the call and never 
returned. In America--the greatest country on Earth--our founding 
promise of life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness is preserved 
only through the sacrifice of our heroes.
  The American flag flies in red, white, and blue--each color rich with 
meaning. Blue stands for vigilance and justice, a call to remain 
steadfast in our values. White reflects our Nations ideals and purity 
of purpose. Red honors the valor and the blood shed by those who died 
defending our rights.

  This weekend, across Western New York and the Southern Tier, veterans 
and families will gather at town centers, VFW halls and cemeteries to 
commemorate the fallen and ensure that their sacrifice will never be 
forgotten. This is a responsibility that we all must pass on to the 
next generation, to continue this great tradition in memory of those 
who made this life of freedom and opportunity possible.
  Today, we remember those weve lost and give thanks to the veterans 
still among us. We are the land of the free because we are the home of 
the brave. The selflessness of our service members inspires deep 
gratitude every day--not just on Memorial Day. May we never forget 
their sacrifice.
Title IV of Senate Resolution 4, agreed to by the Senate of February 
4, 1977, calls for establishment of a system for a computerized 
schedule of all meetings and hearings of Senate committees, 
subcommittees, joint committees, and committees of conference. This 
title requires all such committees to notify the Office of the Senate 
Daily Digest--designated by the Rules Committee--of the time, place and 
purpose of the meetings, when scheduled and any cancellations or 
changes in the meetings as they occur.
  As an additional procedure along with the computerization of this 
information, the Office of the Senate Daily Digest will prepare this 
information for printing in the Extensions of Remarks section of the 
Congressional Record on Monday and Wednesday of each week.
  Meetings scheduled for Thursday, May 22, 2025 may be found in the 
Daily Digest of todays Record.

                                 JUNE 4
     10 a.m.
       Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions
         To hold hearings to examine the reauthorization of the 
           over-the-counter monograph drug user fee program.
                                                            SD-430

                                 JUNE 5
     10:30 a.m.
       Committee on Foreign Relations
         Business meeting to consider S. 1397, to require the 
           Secretary of State to establish a quantum cooperation 
           program to enhance international cooperation in quantum 
           information science, S. 1463, to allow the Secretary of 
           the Interior to enter into memoranda of understanding 
           for the purpose of scientific and technical cooperation 
           in the mapping of critical minerals and rare earth 
           elements, S. 1478, to provide the United States 
           Government with additional tools to deter state and 
           non-state actors from wrongfully detaining United 
           States nationals for political leverage, S. 1579, to 
           provide for the treatment of the Association of 
           Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), the European 
           Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN), and the 
           Pacific Islands Forum (PIF) as international 
           organizations for purposes of the International 
           Organizations Immunities Act, S. 1731, to require the 
           Secretary of State and the Secretary of Defense to 
           develop a strategy in response to the global basing 
           intentions of the Peoples Republic of China, S. 1780, 
           to provide for congressional oversight of security 
           assistance to Mexico, S. 1801, to facilitate the 
           development of a whole-of-government strategy for 
           nuclear cooperation and nuclear exports, S. Res. 227, 
           condemning Hamas for its premeditated, coordinated, and 
           brutal terrorist attacks on October 7, 2023, against 
           Israel and demanding that Hamas immediately release all 
           remaining hostages and return them to safety, an 
           original bill entitled, ``Defending International 
           Security by Restricting Unlawful Partnerships and 
           Tactics (``DISRUPT) Act, and an original bill 
           entitled, ``Taiwan Non-Discrimination Act of 2025.
                                                             S-116
I rise today to honor the life and legacy 
of a great man of faith and a true community servant leader, Deacon 
Ronald Levester Sewell. Deacon Sewell, a native of Columbia, South 
Carolina, passed away on Saturday, May 10, 2025. Although he is no 
longer with us in person, his legacy lives on through his life of 
service.
  Deacon Sewell attended C.A. Johnson High School, graduating in 1965. 
He furthered his academic journey at Benedict College, earning his 
degree in 1973. He later went on to obtain a Master of Education degree 
from Cambridge College.
  Over an extraordinary 35-year career, he transformed countless lives 
and was a pivotal member of his community. Deacon Sewell served as an 
educator, coach, and an athletic administrator within Richland School 
District One, igniting a passion for learning and excellence in his 
students.
  Beyond his notable contributions in education, Deacon Sewell proudly 
saved six years in the U.S. Air Force, followed by several years in the 
Air Force Reserve at McEntire Joint National Guard Base. His dedicated 
service included a tour during Operation Desert Storm in the Persian 
Gulf War, where he exemplified unwavering bravery and dedication to his 
country.
  The morals and values that were the foundation of his life were 
rooted in his faith in God. A devoted member of First Calvary Baptist 
Church, Deacon Sewells faith was a cornerstone of his life. He was 
baptized there and later ordained as a Deacon in 2007 under the 
leadership of Dr. Reverend Samuel K. Lewis.
  Throughout his journey he has been empowered by the encouragement and 
support of his beautiful family. Deacon Sewell was married to Maxine 
Cunningham for 50 years, and was a devoted father to four children: Dr. 
Kenya Sewell (Randy) James, Dr. Candace Sewell Hannah, Warren M. 
Sewell, and Sharon E. Lowman.
, Deacon Sewell spent his lifetime as a military pioneer 
and humble servant to his fellow citizens of South Carolina and to the 
United States of America. I ask that you and our colleagues join me in 
recognizing and honoring Deacon Sewells commitment to service, 
sacrifices for, and contribution to this great Nation.
I rise today to honor and pay tribute to a 
remarkable South Carolinian--a woman who embodied the values of hard 
work, resilience, compassion, and grace.
  Thelma Lee Edwards-Riley, a daughter of Holy Hill, South Carolina, 
was born on July 10, 1930. She was a woman who was devoted to her 
family. A mother to Martha Stocker and Calvin Riley, she led a life 
full of warmth, love, and quiet strength. Her pride in her children was 
unbounded.
  She found joy in the simple and honest labor of working in her yard, 
tending lovingly to her plants and flowers. Her garden reflected her 
spirit: nurturing, patient, and full of life. Just as she cultivated 
her garden, she poured care, time, and love into the lives of those 
around her, most especially Colombias Belvedere Community.
  Thelma Riley had a heart always ready to help whoever was in need. 
Whether someone needed a comforting word, a helping hand, or just a 
listening ear--she was there without hesitation and without 
expectation.
  The personification of the life and legacy of Ms. Riley is 
encapsulated in the twenty-fifth chapter of Mark, verse 40, `Truly I 
tell you, whatever you did for one of the least of these brothers and 
sisters of mine, you did for me. 
, I ask you and our colleagues to join me in celebrating 
the life of Ms. Thelma Lee Edwards-Riley. Let us remember her with the 
love she gave so freely. Let us keep her memory alive through the acts 
of kindness we show, the care we offer others, and the strength we find 
in one another. Her life was a blessing and her memory a treasure.