David Lee Hobson passed away on Sunday, 
October 6, 2024, at Miami Valley Hospital in Dayton, Ohio after a brief 
illness.

  Born on October 17, 1936, in Cincinnati to Winton Lee Hobson and 
Florence Todd Hobson, Dave grew up with his sisters, Martha and Susan. 
His father worked for the U.S. Postal Service and died when Dave was in 
the eighth grade. He and his sisters were raised in the Bond Hill 
neighborhood of Cincinnati by his mother, an elementary school teacher, 
and her sister-in-law. He graduated from Withrow High School in 
Cincinnati, Ohio Wesleyan University and The Ohio State University 
College of Law.
  He met the love of his life, Carolyn, at Ohio Wesleyan and, after 
marrying on December 20, 1958, they were inseparable throughout their 
65 plus years together. Their marriage blessed them with three children 
whom they raised in Springfield, Ohio.
  Dave served in the Air National Guard and was called up to active 
duty during the Berlin Wall Crisis. In 1965, he moved his family to 
Springfield, Ohio to work at the Kissell Company and later for several 
commercial real estate companies in association with Howard Noonan and 
Martin Levine, who served as mentors throughout his life. He was a 
member of Rotary International, a 33rd Degree Mason, and remained 
active in his college fraternity, Sigma Alpha Epsilon--all experiences 
that instilled in him a compassion to help others and the value of 
community service.
  At the age of 46, Dave brought his business acumen, developed in 
commercial real estate and his commitment to community involvement to 
the Ohio Senate where he served for eight years. During his service, 
his peers elected him to the leadership positions of Majority Whip and 
President Pro Tempore.
  In the Ohio Senate, his work focused on health and human services. He 
led the effort to enact the first state law in the nation to provide 
support to people diagnosed and living with HIV and AIDS, helped 
increase state resources for Alzheimers Disease and spearheaded 
reforms to the Ohio Department of Developmental Disabilities. In 1990, 
Dave was elected to the U.S. House of Representatives, where he 
represented Ohios 7th Congressional District until his retirement in 
2009. During his nine terms in Congress, he gained a reputation as a 
pragmatic and bipartisan lawmaker, committed to fiscal responsibility 
and a strong national defense. He served as the second-ranking member 
of the House Budget Committee and helped lead efforts in 1998 to 
balance the federal budget for the first time since 1969. He also 
served as a key member of the powerful House Appropriations Committee, 
where he chaired the Military Construction and Energy and Water 
Development subcommittees. In these positions Dave championed 
improvements in housing for military personnel and their families 
around the world, improved technology for members of the Armed Forces 
and led new investments in commercial and recreational waterways, the 
Florida Everglades restoration and natural resources conservation 
across the country.
  Some of Daves most notable achievements were on behalf of 
Springfield Air National Guard Base, Wright-Patterson Air Force Base in 
Dayton, NASA Glenn Research Center in Cleveland and the Ohio Western 
Reserve National Cemetery. His leadership also helped establish the D-
Day Visitors Center at the American Cemetery in Normandy, France, and 
in recognition of these and other contributions, Dave was inducted into 
the Ohio Veterans Hall of Fame and the Dayton Regions Walk of Fame. 
Additionally, Wright-Patterson AFB named a street ``Hobson Way in his 
honor, Clark State College named its Beavercreek center ``Dave Hobson 
Hall and several universities bestowed him honorary degrees.
  Beyond his legislative accomplishments, Dave was known for his 
humility, integrity, and kindness, all of which he expressed in his 
careful dedication and attention to constituent service and being 
accessible to the people of his district.
  Dave is survived by his beloved wife, Carolyn (Alexander) of 65 
years, children Susan (Jeff) Nunner, Lynn (Jay) Foran and Doug 
(Stephanie) Hobson; grandchildren Katherine, Alexander (Summer) and 
Samuel Nunner, Whitney (Alex) Fagan, Jameson, Callan and Brennan Foran, 
and Evan Hobson; great-grandchildren Ryker, Declan and Finn Fagan, 
sisters Martha Lampe and Susan Hoerner, and a loving nephew and nieces. 
A memorial service celebrating Daves life and legacy will be held on 
Saturday, November 2, 2024 at 11:00 am at High Street United Methodist 
Church, 230 East High Street, Springfield, Ohio. The service was live-
streamed on the High St. United Methodist Churchs You Tube channel.
  In lieu of flowers, the family asks that donations be made to The 
Springfield Foundation, c/o the Dave and Carolyn Hobson Charitable 
Fund, 333 N. Limestone Street, Suite 201, Springfield, OH 45503-4250, 
&lt;a href=http://www.springfieldfoundation.org.
&gt;www.springfieldfoundation.org.
&lt;/a&gt; In honor of Daves life, the family hopes that you will be inspired 
to carry forth his mission of helping people and bringing together 
others for positive solutions for all.
I rise today to honor Jose 
``Moke Simon III upon his retirement after two terms as a Lake County 
Supervisor and to recognize his contributions to the Middletown 
Rancheria and the Lake County community. Mr. Simon, born and raised in 
Middletown, California, has dedicated his life to the advancement and 
well-being of his community.
  As Middletown Rancherias Tribal Chairman, Mr. Simon oversees Tribal 
Government Operations and represents the Tribe in all critical decision 
impacting Middletown Rancheria. During his tenure, Mr. Simon 
successfuljy guided the investment of $47.5 million dollars in the 
construction of Twin Pine Casino. As Chairman, he also successfully 
negotiated with the State of California to secure the gaming compact 
for the Middletown Rancheria, leading to substantial economic 
development for his tribe. Furthermore, Mr. Simons leadership was 
critical to the Tribes acquisition of the Mount St. Helena Brewing 
Co., marking the first off-reservation business owned by Middletown 
Rancheria.
  In recognition of his commitment to Middletown Rancherias economic 
development, in 2016, Mr. Simon received the Wendall Chino Humanitarian 
Award, the highest honor for tribal leaders and awarded by the National 
Indian Gaming Association.
  In 2017, Mr. Simon became the first Native American elected to the 
Lake County Board of Supervisors representing District 1, where he has 
continued to work tirelessly for his constituents and contribute to 
local governance.
  In times of crisis, Mr. Simons leadership has been invaluable. 
During the catastrophic Valley Fire of 2015, which devastated over 
76,000 acres, he provided stability to his district as they faced one 
of Californias most destructive wildfires. Governor Gavin Newsom later 
named Mr. Simon to the State Board of Fire Services in September 2019.
  Beyond his work with the Tribe and the Board of Supervisors, Mr. 
Simon is a former professional football player. During his football 
career. Mr. Simon played with the NFLs Indianapolis Colts, AFLs 
Arizona Rattlers, WFLs Barcelona Dragons in Spain, and the Scottish 
Claymores in Scotland. An avid sports enthusiast, Mr. Simon continues 
to serve his community as the defensive coach for the local high 
schools varsity football team.
, 
son Joshua and daughter Theresa, cherishing time with his grandchildren 
Taylor and Bently, and staying deeply involved in family and community 
life.
, as we bid farewell to Supervisor Jose ``Moke Simon 
III, we thank him for his service, his contributions to the economic 
and cultural advancement of his Tribe, and his dedication to public 
service in Lake County. His leadership has uplifted our community, and 
it is only fitting that we honor him here today as he embarks on this 
new chapter of his life.
I was unexpectedly held up and missed two 
roll call votes.
  Had I been present, I would have voted YEA on Roll Call No. 456; and 
YEA on Roll Call No. 457.
I rise with deep gratitude to Ben Jackson 
for his many years of service and exceptional work for Texas Seventh 
Congressional District. After working in Congress for more than 13 
years and for our district for almost six years, Ben is leaving my 
office this year.
  Ben has served Texas Seventh Congressional District for as long as I 
have, joining our staff as Legislative Director when we opened our 
office in January 2019. An integral part of my team from the start, he 
has worked tirelessly and effectively, handling issues of all kinds. As 
our office grew, so did Bens role in it, as he moved from Legislative 
Director to Deputy Chief of Staff and Senior Advisor. He has worked on 
issues of great importance to our district with a portfolio that 
includes energy, tax, financial services, and economic issues. While 
working in my office, Ben also grew in his personal life and became a 
father to his son, Charles.
  Throughout his almost six years serving our district, Ben has built 
meaningful relationships across our community and has led the way on 
efforts to ensure our districts and our regions priorities are 
included in our work, and that our work in Washington delivers 
meaningful progress back home.
  Outstanding in his policy work, Ben was also an outstanding team 
member who always remained supportive of his colleagues and served as a 
mentor for many of them. His work and his positive contributions have 
had--and will continue to have--a lasting impact on our team and on our 
district, and we will miss him.
, on behalf of Texas Seventh Congressional District, I 
express my deep and sincere gratitude and best wishes to Ben Jackson as 
he begins a new chapter.
I rise today to honor Metra 
Commuter Railroad as it celebrates its 40th anniversary. Over the last 
four decades, Mara has provided hundreds of millions of rides to its 
passengers while gaining a reputation for timeliness, reliability, and 
safety. At its inception in 1984. Metra faced multiple challenges. It 
inherited an underinvested rail system and was immediately tasked with 
addressing a history of unstandardized fares and services in addition 
to stabilizing struggling private rail lines. Through acquisitions, 
subsidizations. and streamlining of services, Metra delivered on 
unifying commuter rail across the Chicago region.
  Though Metra still faces steep funding challenges for its capital and 
operational needs, it remains a steady, reliable source of 
transportation for its riders. It continues to rebuild and replace 
downtown stations, outlying stations, track and signals, and other 
infrastructure. Metra has purchased new locomotives and railcars, 
modernized and expanded service, and has survived through underground 
floods, polar vortexes, and a global pandemic.
  I commend Metras workers for continuing to provide rides every day 
to my constituents, and I thank Metras leadership for continuing to 
push innovation in Chicagos commuter rail system. I congratulate Metra 
on its 40th anniversary and look forward to many more years of reliable 
commuter rail service.
it is my pleasure to congratulate the YMCA 
of Greater Monmouth County on its 150th Anniversary and continued 
endeavor to strengthen the individuals, families and communities it 
serves. During their 150th Anniversary Dinner, they plan to commemorate 
this milestone with the pursuit of offering expansive access to 
fitness, mental health, and education. It is my privilege to recognize 
the outstanding efforts of the YMCA of Greater Monmouth County.
  Since March 16, 1874, this commendable organization has nurtured 
children and families while fostering strong connected communities 
throughout the Monmouth County area. The long history of this YMCA 
providing youth enrichment to families includes access to summer camp, 
preschool, and before and after care. It is truly honorable to fathom 
the transformation of countless lives across generations from this last 
century and on. It is honorable to recognize the community organizers 
who have demonstrated resilience and unity, as this remarkably shapes 
the impact of their chapter.
  Begun in efforts to support youth in the local area, the YMCA of 
Greater Monmouth County now stands as a community center. The 
acquisition of resources necessary and otherwise inaccessible can be 
attributed to invaluable growth. Affordable childcare is one of the 
most appreciated programs, with therapeutic counseling, tutoring, teen 
leadership and college pathways tightly following. I applaud this 
organizations beloved endless engagement and remarkable success in 
reaching the Monmouth County community.
  Once again, I sincerely hope my colleagues will join me in 
congratulating the YMCA of Greater Monmouth County on its 150th 
Anniversary of service. The commitment to wellness has contributed 
support to help families thrive in our community, and therefore is 
truly deserving of this bodys recognition.
December 8, 2024, marks the 100th anniversary 
of the incorporation of the ``Town of Sebastian, which was followed 
by the re-incorporation of the ``City of Sebastian in 1925, the same 
year Indian River County was created by the Florida Legislature. During 
a meeting on December 8, 1924, at 7:30 p.m., eighty-two of the 105 
registered voters were present and voted on motions to incorporate the 
proposed corporate limits as outlined in the meeting notice, selecting 
the name of the new municipal corporation as the ``Town of Sebastian, 
creating the official seal for town business, and electing the mayor, 
five aldermen, a clerk, and marshal.
  The town took its name from the St. Sebastian River, which was named 
for the martyred Roman Christian, who was martyred by the Emperor 
Diocletian around 288 A.D. The Roman Catholic Church canonized 
Sebastian in 374, and he has been named the patron saint of archers, 
athletes, migrants, and pin-makers. Beginning in the 1880s, the 
community was named New Haven after Thomas New, a retired Methodist 
minister who moved from Michigan. Mr. New worked to establish the 
communitys first post office and served as the first postmaster. This 
was the first post office between Melbourne and Fort Pierce.
  However, long before European and 19th-century settlers arrived in 
the area, the indigenous Ais Indians lived on the east coast of Florida 
between Cape Canaveral and Jupiter for hundreds and possibly thousands 
of years. The Ais were hunter-gatherers and caught fish, turtles, and 
shellfish in the St. Sebastian River, Indian River Lagoon, and the 
Atlantic Ocean, and picked sabal palm berries and other fruit in the 
area. The Spanish even referred to the Indian River Lagoon as Rio de 
Ais because the Lagoon was so important to the tribe for food and 
transportation.
  One of the most significant events to happen to Sebastian was the 
arrival of the Florida East Coast Railway in de 1893 to 94. Another 
major change was the intensity by which commercial fishing started in 
1895 after a disastrous freeze in 1894. By the end of 1895, nearly 
104,000 pounds of fish were shipped from Sebastian, mostly to New York, 
Richmond, and New Orleans. Sebastian residents also grew truck crops 
such as beans, winter vegetables, and pineapples. Resident Paul Kroegel 
worked to protect local pelicans from being killed for their feathers 
which were used in the hat industry, which ultimately led to President 
Theodore Roosevelt creating the first migratory bird refuge in the 
United States on Pelican Island in 1903.
  In the early 20th century, Sebastian, like the rest of the nation, 
suffered during the Great Depression, but World War II and the postwar 
era brought immense change. The Mackle Brothers, a developer based in 
Miami, which later became General Development Corporation, bought land 
throughout Florida for planned communities in rural parts of the state, 
including 1,345 acres in Sebastian in 1957 to develop Sebastian 
Highlands.
  By the 2000 census, Sebastian became the most populous city in Indian 
River County, and by 2023, the population had grown to 26,825. Besides 
having the distinction of being the home of Pelican Island, Sebastian 
has been named a Millenium City and a Tree City USA. The city has a 
strong retirement community, with 35 percent of the population 65 or 
older. Almost 21 percent of the jobs are in health care and social 
assistance, 18 percent in retail, and 12 percent in accommodations and 
food service. Sebastian has a median household income of nearly 
$73,000, and almost 30 percent of residents 25 or older hold a 
bachelors degree or other advanced degree. The city also possesses 
first-class schools, roads, health care and recreation facilities.
  I ask my colleagues to join me in recognizing the Centennial of 
Sebastian. Heres to 100 more years of memories and community.
Title IV of Senate Resolution 4, agreed to by the Senate of February 
4, 1977, calls for establishment of a system for a computerized 
schedule of all meetings and hearings of Senate committees, 
subcommittees, joint committees, and committees of conference. This 
title requires all such committees to notify the Office of the Senate 
Daily Digest--designated by the Rules Committee--of the time, place and 
purpose of the meetings, when scheduled and any cancellations or 
changes in the meetings as they occur.
  As an additional procedure along with the computerization of this 
information, the Office of the Senate Daily Digest will prepare this 
information for printing in the Extensions of Remarks section of the 
Congressional Record on Monday and Wednesday of each week.
  Meetings scheduled for Thursday, November 14, 2024 may be found in 
the Daily Digest of todays Record.

     9:30 a.m.
       Committee on Energy and Natural Resources
         Business meeting to consider S. 254, to amend the Omnibus 
           Parks and Public Lands Management Act of 1996 to 
           provide for the establishment of a Ski Area Fee 
           Retention Account, S. 373, to modify the disposition of 
           certain outer Continental Shelf revenues and to open 
           Federal financial sharing to heighten opportunities for 
           renewable energy, S. 482, to amend the Klamath Basin 
           Water Supply Enhancement Act of 2000 to provide the 
           Secretary of the Interior with certain authorities with 
           respect to projects affecting the Klamath Basin 
           watershed, S. 620, to provide for the distribution of 
           certain outer Continental Shelf revenues to the State 
           of Alaska, S. 739, to clarify jurisdiction with respect 
           to certain Bureau of Reclamation pumped storage 
           development, S. 914, to establish an energy threat 
           analysis center in the Department of Energy, S. 1553, 
           to amend the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 
           1976 to improve the management of grazing permits and 
           leases, S. 1764, to improve Federal activities relating 
           to wildfires, S. 2132, to require the Secretary of 
           Agriculture to establish a pilot program for the 
           establishment and use of a pre-fire-suppression stand 
           density index, S. 2151, to amend the Southwest Forest 
           Health and Wildlife Prevention Act of 2004 to require 
           the establishment of an additional Institute under that 
           Act, S. 2156, to amend the John D. Dingell, Jr. 
           Conservation, Management, and Recreation Act to 
           authorize additional entities to be eligible to 
           complete the maintenance work on Bolts Ditch and the 
           Bolts Ditch Headgate within the Holy Cross Wilderness, 
           Colorado, S. 2160, to amend the Omnibus Public Land 
           Management Act of 2009 to authorize certain 
           extraordinary operation and maintenance work for urban 
           canals of concern, S. 2169, to authorize the Secretary 
           of the Interior to carry out watershed pilots, S. 2506, 
           to amend the National Trails System Act to designate 
           the Route 66 National Historic Trail, S. 2620, to 
           establish the Chesapeake National Recreation Area as a 
           unit of the National Park System, S. 2742, to establish 
           the Fort Ontario National Monument in the State of New 
           York as a unit of the National Park System, S. 2743, to 
           amend the John D. Dingell, Jr. Conservation, 
           Management, and Recreation Act to designate as a 
           component of the National Heritage Area System the 
           Finger Lakes National Heritage

           Area in the State of New York, S. 2784, to amend the 
           Dayton Aviation Heritage Preservation Act of 1992 to 
           adjust the boundary of the Dayton Aviation Heritage 
           National Historical Park, S. 2867, to address the 
           forest health crisis on the National Forest System and 
           public lands, S. 2927, to amend the Omnibus Public Land 
           Management Act of 2009 to increase Tribal access to 
           water conservation and efficiency grants, S. 2991, to 
           improve revegetation and carbon sequestration 
           activities in the United States, S. 3123, to provide 
           for the standardization, consolidation, and publication 
           of data relating to public outdoor recreational use of 
           Federal waterways among Federal land and water 
           management agencies, S. 3195, to designate the General 
           George C. Marshall House, in the Commonwealth of 
           Virginia, as an affiliated area of the National Park 
           System, S. 3241, to establish the Grand Village of the 
           Natchez Indians and Jefferson College as affiliated 
           areas of the Natchez Historical Park, S. 3346, to amend 
           the Wild and Scenic Rivers Act to designate certain 
           streams in the greater Yellowstone ecosystem and Smith 
           River system in the State of Montana as components of 
           the Wild and Scenic Rivers System, S. 3474, to 
           redesignate the Hulls Cove Visitor Center at Acadia 
           National Park as the ``George J. Mitchell, Jr., Visitor 
           Center, S. 3534, to authorize the Pines Foundation to 
           establish the Fire Island AIDS Memorial, S. 3542, to 
           amend the Atchafalaya National Heritage Area Act to 
           modify the boundary of the Atchafalaya National 
           Heritage Area, S. 3543, to establish the Historic 
           Greenwood District-Black Wall Street National Monument 
           in the State of Oklahoma, S. 3544, to designate the 
           visitor and education center at Fort McHenry National 
           Monument and Historic Shrine as the ``Paul S. Sarbanes 
           Visitor and Education Center, S. 3593, to provide for 
           economic development and conservation in Washoe County, 
           Nevada, S. 3596, to amend the Mineral Leasing Act to 
           amend references of gilsonite to asphaltite, S. 3617, 
           to provide equitable treatment for the people of the 
           Village Corporation established for the Native Village 
           of Saxman, Alaska, S. 3631, to require reports on 
           critical mineral and rare earth element resources 
           around the world and a strategy for the development of 
           advanced mining, refining, separation, and processing 
           technologies, S. 3790, to make additional Federal 
           public land available for selection under the Alaska 
           Native Vietnam era veterans land allotment program, S. 
           3985, to amend the Colorado Wilderness Act of 1993 to 
           add certain land to the Sarvis Creek Wilderness, S. 
           4016, to amend the Boulder Canyon Project Act to 
           authorize the Secretary of the Interior to expend 
           amounts in the Colorado River Dam fund, S. 4129, to 
           contribute funds and artifacts to the Theodore 
           Roosevelt Presidential Library in Medora, North Dakota, 
           S. 4164, to authorize the Secretary of the Interior to 
           conduct a special resource study of the Cahokia Mounds 
           and surrounding land in the States of Illinois and 
           Missouri, S. 4209, to provide greater regional access 
           to the Katahdin Woods and Waters National Monument in 
           the State of Maine, S. 4216, to establish the Ocmulgee 
           Mounds National Park and Preserve in the State of 
           Georgia, S. 4218, to designate the visitor center for 
           the First State National Historical Park to be located 
           at the Sheriffs House in New Castle, Delaware, as the 
           ``Thomas R. Carper Visitor Center, S. 4222, to adjust 
           the boundary of the Mojave National Preserve in the 
           State of California to include the land within the 
           Castle Mountains National Monument, S. 4227, to amend 
           the California Desert Protection Act of 1994 to expand 
           the boundary of Joshua Tree National Park, S. 4228, to 
           redesignate the Cottonwood Visitor Center at Joshua 
           Tree National Park as the ``Senator Dianne Feinstein 
           Visitor Center, S. 4242, to extend the authorization 
           of the Reclamation States Emergency Drought Relief Act 
           of 1991, S. 4245, to amend the Omnibus Public Land 
           Management Act of 2009 to reauthorize certain United 
           States Geological Survey water data enhancement 
           programs, S. 4259, to require the Secretary of the 
           Interior to conduct a study to assess the suitability 
           and feasibility of designating certain land as the 
           Lahaina National Heritage Area, S. 4310, to exchange 
           non-Federal land held by the Chugach Alaska Corporation 
           for certain Federal Land in the Chugach Region, S. 
           4347, to provide for the conveyance of certain Federal 
           land at Swanson Reservoir and Hugh Butler Reservoir in 
           the State of Nebraska, S. 4424, to direct the Secretary 
           of the Interior and the Secretary of Agriculture to 
           encourage and expand the use of prescribed fire on land 
           managed by the Department of the Interior or the Forest 
           Service, with an emphasis on units of the National 
           Forest System in the western United States, to 
           acknowledge and support the longstanding use of 
           cultural burning by Tribes and Indigenous 
           practitioners, S. 4431, to reinstate the Bull Mountains 
           Mining Plan Modification, S. 4432, to allow certain 
           Federal minerals to be mined consistent with the Bull 
           Mountains Mining Plan Modification, S. 4451, to require 
           the Secretary of the Interior to enter into an 
           agreement with the National Academy of Sciences to 
           carry out a study on reservation systems for Federal 
           land, S. 4454, to provide for the establishment of an 
           Operational Flexibility Grazing Management Program on 
           land managed by the Bureau of Land Management, S. 4457, 
           to provide for conservation and economic development in 
           the State of Nevada, S. 4576, to amend the Energy and 
           Water Development and Related Agencies Appropriations 
           Act, 2015, to reauthorize the Colorado River System 
           conservation pilot program, S. 4607, to designate the 
           Americas National Churchill Museum National Historic 
           Landmark, S. 4664, to require the Secretary of Energy 
           to establish a program to promote the use of artificial 
           intelligence to support the missions of the Department 
           of Energy, S. 4851, to adjust the boundaries of the 
           Golden Gate National Recreation Area to include the 
           Scarper Ridge property, S. 4932, to amend the National 
           Quantum Initiative Act to provide for a research, 
           development, and demonstration program, S. 4936, to 
           require a study relating to the Minidoka National 
           Historic Site, S. 4974, to amend the John D. Dingell, 
           Jr. Conservation, Management, and Recreation Act to 
           reauthorize the National Volcano Early Warning and 
           Monitoring System, S. 4994, to modify the boundary of 
           the Vicksburg National Military Park in the State of 
           Mississippi, S. 4996, to amend Public Law 89-108 to 
           modify the authorization of appropriations for State 
           and Tribal, municipal, rural, and industrial water 
           supplies, S. 4999, to amend the Aquifer Recharge 
           Flexibility Act to clarify a provision relating to 
           conveyances for aquifer recharge purposes, S. 5000, to 
           prohibit the use of amounts from the Upper Colorado 
           River Basin Fund to implement a certain record of 
           decision, S. 5005, to authorize additional funding for 
           the San Joaquin River Restoration Settlement Act, S. 
           5011, to establish the Integrated Water Management 
           Federal Leadership Committee, to provide for improved 
           drought resilience and dam safety, S. 5012, to 
           establish an interest-bearing account for the non-
           Federal contributions to the Lower Colorado River 
           Multi-Species Conservation Program, S. 5013, to make 
           certain modifications to the repayment for the Arkansas 
           Valley Conduit in the State of Colorado, S. 5014, to 
           provide for the establishment of a Water Project 
           Navigators Program, S. 5125, to provide for certain 
           improvements to the housing and workforce programs of 
           Federal land management agencies, H.R. 359, to 
           establish Fort San Geronimo del Boqueron in Puerto Rico 
           as an affiliated area of the National Park System, H.R. 
           3448, to amend chapter 3081 of title 54, United States 
           Code, to enhance the protection and preservation of 
           Americas battlefields, H.R. 4984, to amend the 
           District of Columbia Stadium Act of 1957 to provide for 
           the transfer of administrative jurisdiction over the 
           Robert F. Kennedy Memorial Stadium Campus to the 
           Administrator of General Services and the leasing of 
           the Campus to the District of Columbia for purposes 
           which include commercial and residential development, 
           H.R. 5443, to establish a policy regarding appraisal 
           and valuation services for real property for a 
           transaction over which the Secretary of the Interior 
           has jurisdiction, H.R. 6062, to restore the ability of 
           the people of American Samoa to approve amendments to 
           the territorial constitution based on majority rule in 
           a democratic act of self-determination, as authorized 
           pursuant to an Act of Congress delegating 
           administration of Federal territorial law in the 
           territory to the President, and to the Secretary of the 
           Interior under Executive Order 10264, dated June 29, 
           1951, under which the Constitution of American Samoa 
           was approved and may be amended without requirement for 
           further congressional action, subject to the authority 
           of Congress under the Territorial Clause in article IV, 
           section 3, clause 2 of the United States Constitution, 
           and an original bill to require the Secretary of the 
           Interior to conduct a study of Plum Island, New York.
                                                            SD-366
     10 a.m.
       Committee on the Judiciary
         To hold hearings to examine breaking the Visa-Mastercard 
           duopoly, focusing on bringing competition and lower 
           fees to the credit card system.
                                                            SD-226
     2 p.m.
       Committee on the Judiciary
       Subcommittee on Privacy, Technology, and the Law
         To hold hearings to examine Chinas cybersecurity threat, 
           focusing on big hacks and big tech.
                                                            SD-226

     2:30 p.m.
       Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation
       Subcommittee on Consumer Protection, Product Safety, and 
           Data Security
         To hold hearings to examine protecting consumers from 
           artificial intelligence enabled fraud and scams.
                                                            SR-253
       Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe
         To hold hearings to examine 1000 days of Russias war on 
           Ukraine.
                                                        2358A-RHOB
       Joint Economic Committee
         To hold hearings to examine the 2025 tax policy debate, 
           focusing on the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act.
                                                          210-CHOB
     3:15 p.m.
       Committee on Armed Services
       Subcommittee on Emerging Threats and Capabilities
         To hold closed hearings to examine the activities of the 
           All-domain Anomaly Resolution Office, to be immediately 
           followed by an open session in SD-G50.
                                                           SVC-217

     9:30 a.m.
       Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
         Business meeting to consider S. 2315, to provide for the 
           creation of the missing Armed Forces and civilian 
           personnel Records Collection at the National Archives, 
           to require the expeditious public transmission to the 
           Archivist and public disclosure of missing Armed Forces 
           and civilian personnel records, S. 2270, to establish 
           and maintain a database within each agency for 
           executive branch ethics records of noncareer 
           appointees, S. 5302, to amend title 5, United States 
           Code, to address the responsibilities of the 
           Administrator of General Services with respect to 
           Federal advisory committees, S. 5102, to require annual 
           reports on counter illicit cross-border tunnel 
           operations, S. 5028, to require Federal contractors to 
           implement a vulnerability disclosure policy consistent 
           with NIST guidelines, S. 5019, to designate the 
           facility of the United States Postal Service located at 
           340 South Loudon Avenue in Baltimore, Maryland, as the 
           ``United States Representative Elijah E. Cummings Post 
           Office Building, H.R. 6972, to amend title 5, United 
           States Code, to require an Executive agency whose head 
           is a member of the National Security Council to notify 
           the Executive Office of the President, the Comptroller 
           General of the United States, and congressional 
           leadership of such head becoming medically 
           incapacitated within 24 hours, H.R. 7528, to amend 
           section 206 of the E-Government Act of 2002 to improve 
           the integrity and management of mass comments and 
           computer-generated comments in the regulatory review 
           process, H.R. 9592, to amend title 44, United States 
           Code, to modernize the Federal Register, H.R. 3208, to 
           amend the Homeland Security Act of 2002 to establish a 
           DHS Cybersecurity On-the-Job Training Program, H.R. 
           7832, to require the Secretary of Homeland Security to 
           develop a plan to identify, integrate, and deploy new, 
           innovative, disruptive, or other emerging or advanced 
           technologies to enhance, or address capability gaps in, 
           border security operations, H.R. 6231, to amend the 
           Homeland Security Act of 2002 to require a prioritized 
           policy issuance review process for the Department of 
           Homeland Security, H.R. 8631, to prohibit the Secretary 
           of Homeland Security from procuring certain foreign-
           made batteries, H.R. 255, to amend the Disaster 
           Recovery Reform Act of 2018 to develop a study 
           regarding streamlining and consolidating information 
           collection and preliminary damage assessments, H.R. 
           9596, to amend title 41, United States Code, and title 
           10, United States Code, to provide best value through 
           the multiple award schedule program, H.R. 7832, to 
           require the Secretary of Homeland Security to develop a 
           plan to identify, integrate, and deploy new, 
           innovative, disruptive, or other emerging or advanced 
           technologies to enhance, or address capability gaps in, 
           border security operations, H.R. 5867, to designate the 
           facility of the United States Postal Service located at 
           109 Live Oaks Boulevard in Casselberry, Florida, as the 
           ``Colonel Joseph William Kittinger II Post Office 
           Building, H.R. 6162, to designate the facility of the 
           United States Postal Service located at 379 North Oates 
           Street in Dothan, Alabama, as the ``LaBruce `Bruce 
           Tidwell Post Office Building, H.R. 6188, to designate 
           the facility of the United States Postal Service 
           located at 420 Highway 17 North in Surfside Beach, 
           South Carolina, as the ``Nancy Yount Childs Post Office 
           Building, H.R. 6633, to designate the facility of the 
           United States Postal Service located at 9355 113th 
           Street in Seminole, Florida, as the ``Army SSG Ryan 
           Christian Knauss Memorial Post Office Building, H.R. 
           6750, to designate the facility of the United States 
           Postal Service located at 501 Mercer Street Southwest 
           in Wilson, North Carolina, as the ``Milton F. Fitch, 
           Sr. Post Office Building, H.R. 8057, to designate the 
           facility of the United States Postal Service located at 
           9317 Bolsa Avenue in Westminster, California, as the 
           ``Little Saigon Vietnam War Veterans Memorial Post 
           Office, an original bill entitled, ``Federal 
           Acquisition Security Council Improvement Act, an 
           original bill entitled, ``Organizing and Revealing the 
           Governments Construction, Hierarchies, Appointments, 
           Responsibilities, and Tasks Act, an original bill 
           entitled, ``Rebuilding with Resilience Act, an 
           original bill entitled, ``Cooperation on Combatting 
           Human Smuggling and Trafficking Act, an original bill 
           entitled, ``DHS Cybersecurity Internship Program Act, 
           an original bill entitled, ``Streamlining Law 
           Enforcement Information Sharing Act, am original bill 
           entitled, ``DHS Intelligence and Analysis Oversight and 
           Transparency Act, and the nominations of Val Butler 
           Demings, of Florida, William Zollars, of Kansas, and 
           Gordon Hartogensis, of Connecticut, each to be a 
           Governor of the United States Postal Service, and James 
           Graham Lake, and Nicholas George Miranda, both to be an 
           Associate Judge of the Superior Court of the District 
           of Columbia.
                                                            SD-342
     9:45 a.m.
       Committee on Environment and Public Works
         Business meeting to consider the nominations of Matthew 
           James Marzano, of Illinois, to be a Member of the 
           Nuclear Regulatory Commission, Matthew Kaplan, of 
           Maryland, to be Federal Cochairperson of the Great 
           Lakes Authority, and 42 General Services Administration 
           resolutions; to be immediately followed by a hearing to 
           examine the 50th anniversary of the Safe Drinking Water 
           Act, focusing on successes, challenges, and charting a 
           path forward.
                                                            SD-406
     10 a.m.
       Committee on Appropriations
         To hold hearings to examine disaster funding needs.
                                                            SD-106
       Committee on the Judiciary
         To hold hearings to examine certain pending nominations.
                                                            SD-226
     2 p.m.
       Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs
       Subcommittee on Economic Policy
         To hold hearings to examine tax policy in 2025, focusing 
           on implications for the American economy.
                                                            SD-538
     3 p.m.
       Committee on Foreign Relations
         To receive a closed briefing from the Secretary of State.
                                                           SVC-217

     10 a.m.
       Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
         To hold hearings to examine threats to the homeland.
                                                            SD-342
I rise today to address the increasing threat 
of nuclear weapons. Last year, the United States spent $51.5 billion on 
nuclear weapons. Imagine if we used even a fraction of that to tackle 
homelessness, fund healthcare, or address the climate crisis. Instead, 
were pouring billions into weapons that could wipe out entire cities 
in seconds.
  The simple truth is, as long as nuclear weapons exist, humanity is at 
risk. One miscalculation, one malfunction, one act of aggression, and 
were looking at a disaster that could end civilization as we know it. 
Keeping these weapons isnt about strength or security--its about 
holding on to outdated Cold War fears.
  The only sane position is the complete abolition of these weapons of 
mass destruction from the face of the planet. But this will only happen 
with bold leadership from the United States.
  As tensions rise with adversaries like Russia and China, and concerns 
grow about nuclear proliferation in volatile regions like the Middle 
East, the threat of nuclear war is more urgent than it has been since 
the Cuban Missile Crisis.
  Thats why Im grateful to my colleague, Congressman Jim McGovern, 
for his tireless work in drawing attention to this critical issue. He 
understands that we have a moral imperative to act.
  Its time for the United States to join the Treaty on the Prohibition 
of Nuclear Weapons and take a real stand for disarmament. Maintaining 
an arsenal of world-ending weapons is not a sign of strength--it is a 
terrifying vulnerability.
  The American people deserve leaders who will prioritize human lives 
over outdated Cold War posturing. We have the chance to make the world 
a safer place, redirect resources to pressing domestic needs, and 
fulfill our obligation to future generations.
  The time for action has never been more pressing.