I rise today to commemorate the 
extraordinary life of Valerie Denise Campbell--a pillar of the Lake 
Como community, who was better known as Denise to the people who loved 
her. Denise attended Como Elementary School and then went on to 
Arlington Heights High School to support the desegregation of schools 
in Fort Worth. She then went on after high school graduation to attend 
Texas Womens University in 1975, where she majored in music education. 
After college, she began her career at General Dynamics and later had a 
32-year career serving North Texas children with Fort Worth ISD, 
teaching at Burton Hill Elementary.
  Denise, a staunch woman of faith, was baptized by the late Pastor 
G.W. Burton. As a young girl, Denise began playing piano at the Zion 
Baptist Church in Church School and eventually on Sunday mornings. She 
also was a loving wife, mother, and family member to many. She was the 
wife of Wendell Campbell for 47 years, was the mother to three 
beautiful children, a grandmother, a family member, and was also a 
loving pet owner.
  Denise was sometimes referred to as ``The Music Librarian because 
she was a gifted and talented musician. She loved music, and her life 
was dedicated to the Lord, family, and sacred music. For years, she 
played at the Zion Baptist Church under the pastoral leadership of the 
Reverends J.W. Briscoe and Maurice E. Barnes. Later, she went on to 
join her husband at the West Mount Moriah Baptist Church, where she was 
greeted with joy and accolades. Without taking a break, she began to 
play the piano and organ there.
  I rise again to commemorate her memory and wish my deepest 
condolences to everyone whose lives she touched.
I rise today to congratulate the Sirmon Family 
of Baldwin County on their family farm being awarded the 2024 Alabama 
Farm of Distinction. Sirmon Farms is owned by Joel and Patti Sirmon, 
and Joels mother, Shirley, and brother, James also help run the 5-
generation family-owned farm. At Sirmon Farms, they grow cotton, corn, 
peanuts, and sweet potatoes across 4500 acres in the Belforest 
Community. They will go on to represent Alabama during the Sunbelt 
Agriculture Expo in the Southeastern Farmer of the Year contest this 
fall. Congratulations to the Sirmon Family and their family farm. I am 
thankful for the impact they make on our state, and I am proud to be 
their representative.
-DOVE. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to honor a great public 
servant, colleague, and friend, Megan Garrison. Megan was a staffer in 
various California state government offices for over a decade before 
working for me as we served the people of Assembly District 54, 
starting in 2019, and the people of Senate District 30, starting in 
2021. Notably, Megan helped me transition to my role as a new Member in 
this very body and served as Director of Operations for Californias 
37th Congressional District at the beginning of this Congress.
  Megan was an exceptional scheduler who brought a wealth of experience 
to her role. Throughout many long days and late nights in the 
California State Senate, she juggled conflicting events and last-minute 
crises, always ensuring that my staff and I were taken care of. Her 
dedication enabled all of us to do our best work for our constituents.
  Megan managed a complex and dynamic calendar, scheduled District and 
Capitol meetings, and coordinated myriad requests that came through the 
office. She also handled front desk management and facilitated 
legislative resolutions, predicting office needs ahead of time so that 
we would be set up for success. Megans keen sense of organization and 
detail-oriented approach to her job were invaluable assets.
  Megan maintained exceptional professionalism through stressful 
situations. Her interpersonal skills and her savvy approach to problem-
solving made her an asset to the team. In addition to her excellent 
scheduling abilities, Megan had extensive knowledge of the California 
state legislature and the political landscape. As a former Capitol 
staffer, she understood the intricacies of the legislative process and 
could navigate it easily and applied this knowledge to best serve 
constituents. Most importantly, Megans deep sense of public service 
propelled her to positions of public trust.
  Megans exceptional work ethic and friendly demeanor earned her the 
respect and admiration of everyone she worked with. Her positive 
attitude and ability to maintain a calm demeanor, even in high-pressure 
situations, made her well-liked by everyone. Megan was a valuable asset 
to the team and a trusted friend to many of her coworkers.
  Throughout her long career of hard work and many late nights in 
Sacramento and Washington, D.C., Megan remained dedicated to being 
there for her family. It takes a strong woman to juggle the long hours 
and taxing work of politics while always showing up for her amazing 
daughters and son. Megans dedication to her family life is an 
inspiration for all of us. And now, Id like to congratulate Megan on 
becoming a new grandmother. I am truly delighted for Megan and her 
family.
  Megan is back in Sacramento, living her best life with her doting 
family who look up to her and cherish her intelligence and warmth. 
While I miss Megan cracking jokes during the workday, I wish her the 
best in this new chapter. I thank Megan for her many years of service 
and dedication to the people of Los Angeles.
I rise today to honor the life of Mayor 
David Helms, who passed away on March 20th, at the age of 83.
  Mayor Helms was born on October 11, 1940, in Glade Spring, Virginia. 
Upon his graduation from Glade Spring High School, he studied 
elementary education at Emory &amp; Henry College. Later, he received his 
masters degree in education from Radford University.
  His first education jobs included teaching stints at Meadowview 
Elementary School and Glade Spring Elementary School. Later, Mr. Helms 
served as Assistant Principal and Principal of Marion Primary School. 
He served in his role as Principal until his retirement from education 
in 2000.
  From 1990-2000, Mr. Helms served on the Marion Town Council. He 
became Marions Mayor in 2000. In public office, Mayor Helms pursued 
projects to revitalize downtown Marion and improve his community.
  Mayor Helms was a fierce advocate in recognizing veterans for their 
contributions and sacrifices. He worked closely with the Marion VFW 
chapter and the East Tennessee Chapter of Rolling Thunder. Mayor Helms 
also played an instrumental role in promoting Marions Memorial Day 
activities. Marions Memorial Day parade is one of the most patriotic 
festivities in the Ninth District of Virginia. I have loved being in 
the parade with Mayor Helms. It receives widespread praise across the 
Commonwealth and the region every year.
  Also, Mayor Helms was an active member of the Glade Spring Volunteer 
Fire Department. He admitted that firefighting and rescue services were 
in his blood.
  Mayor Helms is survived by his wife Sue Winsett Helms; brother-in-
law, Clyde Hoots; many cousins, nieces, nephews, and their families.
  I had the pleasure of working with Mayor Helms over the years. His 
love for Marion and Smyth County was evident. As a public-school 
teacher, principal, and town council member, Mayor Helms exhibited some 
of the finest qualities of a public servant.
on April 17, 2024 I inadvertently missed 
Roll Call vote No. 136, H.R. 4639.
  Had I been present, I would have voted YEA on Roll Call No. 136.
today I rise to honor a local Green Bay 
celebrity and Jeopardy champion, Dr. Ben Chan.
  In the Spring of 2023, Ben captured the attention of Jeopardy viewers 
nationwide. He went on a nine-game winning streak and won more than 
$250,000 on the trivia show. While he was competing, the fans were 
charmed by his positive attitude; oftentimes, he could be seen 
``raising-the-roof, and he always placed an exclamation point after 
his name. He shared stories about his dogs, Ruthie and Chester, who he 
plans on spending a portion of his winnings on. Although Bens winning 
streak ended over a controversial rule, he was invited back to compete 
in the Tournament of Champions. Ultimately, Ben has won over $350,000 
on Jeopardy.
  While Ben has an extensive fan-base nationwide, some of his most 
loyal fans reside in his hometown of Green Bay. Ben is an assistant 
professor of philosophy at St. Norbert College in De Pere. The college 
community continues to embrace Ben and his success on Jeopardy. When he 
is not on campus, Ben can be found greeting fans in the community. 
Recently, he hosted public watch parties for his appearances on 
Tournament of Champions. Wisconsinites flocked to local restaurants and 
breweries to cheer him on. In addition to these events, Ben uses his 
platform to promote Northeast Wisconsin organizations. Appletons Minor 
League Baseball Team, the Wisconsin Timber Rattlers, invited Ben to 
throw out the first pitch last summer. He even had the opportunity to 
shoot the famous Bratzooka cannon, which launches brats into the 
stands. When he competed in the Tournament of Champions, he highlighted 
one of Green Bays main attractions, Bay Beach Amusement Park.
, I offer my sincerest congratulations to Dr. Ben Chan. He 
is a trivia genius who is making monumental impacts in the Green Bay 
community. I, along with many Wisconsinites, will miss seeing Ben 
compete on the show. I look forward to seeing what Ben accomplishes 
next.
I rise to recognize a very historic occasion 
for the people of Williams County, ``nestled in the extreme Northwest 
corner of Ohio. The community will begin a weekend of celebration to 
commemorate the milestone.
  Williams County was named for David Williams, a Revolutionary War 
hero involved in the capture of British officer Major John Andre. 
Originally encompassing a larger area of Northwest Ohio, Williams 
County was part of territory set aside for Native American people in 
the Treaty of Greenville. Part of the territory was also disputed 
between Ohio and Michigan, a dispute settled in 1836 which placed the 
county in Ohio.
  The land was part of the ``Great Black Swamp and was the last in 
Ohio to be settled. Because it was swampland, the earliest settlers 
faced severe hardship with travel, farming, and insects. Towering 
native trees blocked sunlight, and conditions were harsh. Yet these 
hardy Ohioans persevered, turning this corner of Northwest Ohio into an 
abundant fertile watershed.
  The Williams County Courthouse, today on the National Registry of 
Historic places, was completed in 1891. It replaced an original log 
structure and one completed in 1845. The latter was considered the best 
such structure in Northwest Ohio at that time.
  With rail and telegraph came opportunities for trade and development, 
leading to ``vibrant economic growth of the 1800s and 1900s, through 
to the diversified local economy of today, according to the history. 
Today, Williams County is home to 2,399 businesses including 111 
manufacturing companies offering solid employment and good wages for a 
diverse and skilled workforce. Famously, Williams County is home to 
Ohio Art--and Etch-A-Sketch--and Spangler Candy which originated and 
produces Dum Dum lollipops and other nostalgic treats.
  Williams County, Ohio is made up of hardy farmers and pleasant towns 
including Alvordton, Blakeslee, Bryan, Edgerton, Edon, Holiday City, 
Kunkle, Lake Seneca, Melbern, Montpelier, Nettle Lake, Pioneer, 
Pulaski, and Williams Center: lovely communities all.
  Well known to most Ohioans is the late Ohio State University football 
coach Woody Hayes. Coach Hayes said, ``I speak at a lot of banquets in 
small towns, because small towns have so many great people. I 
couldnt agree with him more. I have been privileged to represent 
Williams County and can attest to the character and kindness of its 
people. As they take a peek at yesteryear during a weekend of 
ceremonial and enjoyable events, I know they also look to the future 
with hope and celebration. We stand on the shoulders of those who came 
before us and we build the community forward together.
  Onward.
I rise in recognition of Chief Deputy to 
the Smyth County Commissioner of the Revenue, Rebecca ``Becky Kress. 
, having served in the Smyth County 
Commissioners office since 1990.
  Beginning as a deputy, Ms. Kress started her thirty-four-year career 
in the office with great determination. She worked several years 
managing taxpayer assistance, assessing taxes and reviewing business 
and personal property.
She 
exercised great command of her responsibilities and dedication to Smyth 
County. These attributes prompted her rise within the office. In 2008, 
she became Chief Deputy for the Smyth County Commissioner of the 
Revenue.
  She has received honors for her work, garnering the esteemed title of 
Master Deputy Commissioner of the Revenue. Under her leadership, many 
Deputies have enjoyed enrollment in the Master Deputy program.
a wealth of institutional 
knowledge and ensuring seamless operations, as she served three 
different Commissioners. She has given her colleagues invaluable 
insight and wisdom on tax issues. Her contributions to Smyth County 
include delivering fair and precise assessments to its citizens. Ms. 
Kress is a model of outstanding service to her community.
  Congratulations to Ms. Kress on a job well done. I know that her 
colleagues and the residents of Smyth County will greatly miss her 
efforts in her role as Chief Deputy to Commissioner of the Revenue, but 
recognize that she deserves to enjoy retirement with her husband, Don, 
along with her loved ones and friends.
I rise today to recognize the seventy-fifth 
anniversary of the Texas Lions Camp in Kerr County.
  The Texas Lions Camp was incorporated as a 501(c)3 by the State of 
Texas on April 4, 1949. The polio epidemic was rampant during this 
time, and the Texas Lions were looking for ways to give children 
affected by polio a place where they could experience some normalcy in 
their lives. Congress passed two resolutions that authorized the sale 
of excess federal land surrounding the Kerrville Veterans Hospital. One 
of my predecessors, Congressman Ovie Clark Fisher, was instrumental in 
the passage of this legislation. Then-Senator Lyndon Baines Johnson was 
also an early supporter of Texas Lions Camp. Mr. Bill Mickelsen, a Lion 
from Kerrville, traveled tirelessly to Washington, DC to advocate for 
the ``Texas Lions League for Crippled Children camp in Texas. Mr. 
Mickelsen and his friend J.C. ``Buddy Murray created a detailed scale 
model of the Camp and eventually constructed the buildings.
  However, one of the strings attached to the sale of five hundred and 
four acres was that the Lions had to raise $100,000 within six months 
to guarantee construction. In pursuit of these dollars, the Lions 
established their ``life membership status. A Lion was Governor of 
Texas at the time, Allan Shivers. He broadcasted over the radio a call 
for donations to the Camp. Mr. Jack Wiech served as the first president 
of Texas Lions Camp in Kerrville. He went on a speaking tour across the 
State to drum up donations. As the six-month deadline loomed, the Lions 
were still $20,000 short of their goal. Mr. Sealy McCreless of San 
Antonio wrote a check that pushed the Lions over their goal for the 
Camp fundraiser. The next step was to begin construction and raise 
$150,000 to cover those costs. The Lions hit the road again for a 
second fundraising campaign.
, the Lions Clubs International president at the time, 
said the Camp for special needs children ``is the best example of 
Lionism in action. Mr. Petry went on to say that ``what is being done 
in Kerrville under the banner of Texas Lionism must be pleasing in the 
sight of Him Who first taught us to serve, to be our brothers keeper, 
and to put the Golden Rule into practice.
-scale model. Famous 
Kerrville names, including Hal Peterson and Howard Butt of the HEB 
Grocery Company, donated resources to round out the construction and 
supplies for Camp.
  Over the years, the Camp adapted to allow other special-needs 
children to participate. Children living with blindness, hearing and 
speaking disorders, and various crippled limbs all enjoyed Texas Lions 
Camp together. This defied the original prognostications of 
psychologists in the 1950s, who believed children with varying 
disabilities could not get along. However, they learned to help each 
other and combine their strengths to thrive. Several hundred adult 
blind were also trained at the Camp through a contract with the State 
of Texas for a couple decades into the 1980s.
  Every summer, children with physical handicaps such as diabetes, down 
syndrome, polio, missing limbs, blindness, and other disabilities are 
accommodated every year at a weeklong camp session at no cost to their 
families. Over 82,000 children have attended Texas Lions Camp since it 
opened in 1949. The Camp motto is ``All Can Do! Campers experience a 
zip line, climbing wall, ropes course, fishing, boating, swimming, 
archery, arts and crafts, miniature golf, and much more. Therapeutic 
horseback riding was added in the 1980s and became a favorite pastime 
for campers. A more recent addition is the family camping experience, 
allowing the families of kids with special needs to experience Texas 
Lions Camp.
  On a more personal note, my father, Don Roy, attended the Lions Camp 
in Kerrville when he was recovering from Polio in the 1950s, and still 
talks about the positive impact it had on him and the other children. I 
am grateful to the eight hundred Texas Lions Clubs International that 
work tirelessly to provide funds for children with special needs to 
attend Texas Lions Camp.
Cathi Herrod serves as president of the 
Center for Arizona Policy. She has been a pro-life and pro-family 
warrior for decades in Arizona. Her efforts at the State Capitol and 
around Arizona communities have helped to ensure that we cherish our 
values and respect the dignity of life. Thanks, in large part, to her 
tireless work, Arizona is one of the top pro-life and pro-family states 
in the Nation, and she continues to fight to maintain this standing in 
the face of overwhelming odds from opposing forces.
  During her distinguished career, she has received the Family Champion 
Award from Focus on the Family, the William Wilberforce Award from 
Students for Life of America, and the Deborah Award from Family Life 
Radio.
  On behalf of Arizonas Eighth Congressional District, I applaud Cathi 
Herrod for her service to our state and thank her for her continued 
action to defend life and family.
John Kavanagh serves as an Arizona State 
Senator for Legislative District 3, covering the Northeast Valley. He 
has served in the Arizona Legislature since 2007. Before coming to 
Arizona, John worked as a police officer for the Port Authority of New 
York and the New Jersey Police Department. I had the privilege of 
serving with Senator Kavanagh for a number of years when I was a state 
legislator, and we worked on several policies and reforms that have 
made a lasting impact for future generations of Arizonans.
  John has earned much recognition for his conservative principles 
during his time in the legislature, including a Lifetime A+ rating from 
the National Rifle Association, a Lifetime A rating from the American 
Conservative Union, and a Lifetime A rating from the Center for Arizona 
Policy.
  Arizonas Eighth Congressional District thanks him for his 
distinguished record of service to his district and our state.
Justin Wilmeth serves as an Arizona State 
Representative for Legislative District 2, covering the North Valley. 
Since joining the legislature in 2021, Justin has been a force to be 
reckoned with, setting a first-year freshman record with eight 
sponsored bills being signed into law by Arizonas governor.
  Justin understands the issues and values that matter most to our 
great state, and he is working every day to protect our laws. From 
securing the border, to enhancing economic prosperity, to defending our 
Second Amendment, to fighting for election integrity and transparency, 
Justin has proven to be a relentless warrior for conservative 
principles and policies, making his constituents very proud of his 
efforts.
  Arizonas Eighth Congressional District is thankful for 
Representative Justin Wilmeths endeavors on behalf of his district and 
our state.
Shawnna Bolick serves as an Arizona State 
Senator for Legislative District 2, covering the North Valley. 
Throughout her time in public service, Shawnna has been a strong 
champion for promoting school choice and protecting the most vulnerable 
among us.
  Thanks, in large part, to her work, Arizona is one of the premier 
states in the nation for school choice and for safeguarding those who 
cannot defend themselves. She has served on Arizonas Early Childhood 
Education and Health Board, the Arizona State Board of Educations 
Academic Standards Development Committee, and the Arizona Juvenile 
Justice Commission. Shawnna is a `can-do conservative fighter. She 
will always stand on her principles, but she looks every day for 
consensus and for opportunities to enact meaningful policy reforms and 
enhancements for her constituents.
  Arizonas Eighth Congressional District is grateful for Shawnnas 
commitment and passion for public service, and I am thankful for the 
example she has left for many to follow.