I rise today to celebrate two 
hardworking Georgia establishments that were named among the Nations 
top 100 restaurants.
  Recently, the restaurant review website `Open Table released its Top 
100 Restaurants in America for 2023 list. Both `Elizabeths and `The 
Olde Pink House made it on the list.
  The review states that `Elizabeths has ``Southern hospitality, fine 
coastal cuisine, and well-chosen wines in a comfortable, elegant 1900 
mansion have made Elizabeth on 37th a favorite destination in Savannah 
since 1981.
  As far as the `Olde Pink House goes, the review states it is 
dining experiences featuring seafood caught daily in local waters, 
prime aged beef, and traditional southern fare.
  Congratulations to these establishments, and I wish them both 
continued success.
I rise today to congratulate two 
Georgia quarterbacks--Calvary Day Schools Jake Merklinger, and New 
Hampstead High Schools RaShawn Truell, for their tied win of the 
Finocchiaro Award.
  The Michael Finocchiaro Memorial Outstanding Football Player Award, 
now in its 43rd year, crowns the standout high school player in 
Savannah and Chatham County. Remarkably, the recent award ceremony 
marked only the second occasion in its history where two players tied 
after voting concluded.
  Merklinger, the senior quarterback who is committed to Tennessee, 
also took home the Ashley Dearing Award as a junior, which is awarded 
to the most versatile male high school athlete.
win this award. He followed that by stating, ``It shows that all the 
hard work that I have put in has paid off. But everything I work for is 
to help our team--our goal is to win a state championship.
  Congratulations again to both Jake and RaShawn.
on behalf of all South 
Carolinians, I am grateful to wish Mrs. Clara Singleton Williams a 
happy 100th birthday.
  Clara Williams, a native of South Carolina, was born on April 9, 
1924, to parents Isaiah Singleton and Annie Livingston Singleton. She 
attended schools in Fairfield, Aiken, and Orangeburg County, where she 
graduated from Wilkerson High School. After, she furthered her 
education at Claflin University for two years.
  In 1946, Clara married Blanton Everett Williams, and together they 
had eleven children, twenty-nine grandchildren, forty-five great 
grandchildren, and three great-great grandchildren. They purchased land 
and a home in Salley, South Carolina, where to this day Clara enjoys 
watching her vegetables and flowers grow. Blanton and Clara were 
happily married for sixty-one years until his death in 2007.
  Clara lives each day to the fullest with warm-hearted memories. Over 
the years, she has embraced diverse pursuits, including

cooking, canning, farming, quilting, and caring for babies, all while 
dedicatedly managing her household and working for Aiken County Public 
Schools. Her spirit of generosity shines through in her unwavering 
commitment to caring for others. Whether tending to her own children 
and many grandchildren or extending her kindness to members of her 
community, Claras compassion knows no bounds.
  As a devout Christian, Clara acknowledged her faith at an early age 
and was baptized at Good Hope Baptist Church in Ridgeway, South 
Carolina. She later became a member of Samaria Baptist Church in 
Springfield, South Carolina, where she still faithfully attends. Her 
love for both her church and her family is palpable, evident in her 
years of dedicated service to both.
  At the age of 100, Clara has witnessed many significant landmarks of 
American history: the Great Depression, World War II, Briggs v. 
Elliott, Brown v. Board of Education, the Civil Rights Act of 1964, the 
Cold War,
9/11, and the first African American President of the United States.
  Today, I honor Mrs. Clara Singleton Williams and wish her a happy 
100th birthday. I am pleased to join her family and friends in 
congratulating her on this remarkable milestone.
I rise today to honor a 
remarkable organization, Delta Missions.
  Delta Missions Ministry is a nonprofit Christian outreach 
organization dedicated to advancing the gospel of Jesus Christ, 
offering discipleship training to local residents, and empowering them 
to actively engage in their local churches. Our mission is to impact 
lives and nurture spiritual transformation through weekly Bible 
studies, lay training, recreational activities, and mentoring programs 
tailored for youth, adults, and senior citizens.
  Under the guidance of Reverend Herron Wilson, Delta Missions was born 
out of a desire to replicate the impactful work experienced during his 
time with The Sonflowers, a mission focused on Vacation Bible School 
(VBS) camps in the town of Sunflower. Upon returning to the Southgate 
Community in

Indianola, Rev. Wilson identified an opportunity to utilize the vacant 
Bethune Center at the heart of the community to launch a VBS camp. The 
Executive Director of South Delta Housing generously granted access to 
the center without charge.
  The inaugural VBS camp took place in the summer of 1995, drawing over 
100 enthusiastic kids. The overwhelming positive response led to the 
transformation of the summer camp into a weekly gathering, providing 
not only spiritual education but also recreational activities, arts and 
crafts, and occasional outings for children and their families.
  This grassroots initiative laid the foundation for Delta Missions, 
which is proud to celebrate its 30th year of service to the Indianola 
community this summer.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in recognizing Delta 
Missions for their passion and dedication to serving their community.
I rise today to honor and 
acknowledge the remarkable achievements of student Jaylen Watson.
  Jaylen Watson, born in Clarksdale, Mississippi, is the youngest of 
two children to his parents, Chandra and Ronald Watson, Sr. His older 
brother is Ronald Watson, Jr. Currently, a student at Madison S. Palmer 
High School in Marks, Mississippi, Jaylen is excelling in his academic 
studies and maintaining an impressive 4.0 GPA. As a proud member of the 
class of 2024, Jaylen looks forward to graduating soon.
  Throughout his high school years, Jaylen has actively participated in 
various community and educational activities. Some of his involvements 
include being a member of the Beta Club, FCCLA, The Global Teaching 
Project, and Jobs for Mississippi Graduates, among others. Within these 
organizations, Jaylen has taken up leadership positions, such as 
serving as a Chick-fil-a Leadership Ambassador and currently holding 
the role of Vice-President in his schools Beta Club. Additionally, he 
takes on responsibility of Class President for his senior class and 
Vice-President for Jobs for Mississippi Graduates.
  While Jaylen has achieved many accomplishments and held numerous 
leadership roles, his faith in God remains his utmost priority. He is 
an active member of the New Covenant Missionary Baptist Church in 
Clarksdale, Mississippi, where he finds solace and support from his 
church family.
  Apart from his academic and extracurricular pursuits, Jaylen has a 
strong passion for caring for the elderly in his community. To support 
this cause, he organized a community service project to raise funds for 
blankets and sock footies during the cold winter months. Jaylen 
successfully purchased these items for all the residents of Quitman 
County Health and Rehab, bringing joy and comfort to the vital citizens 
in need. Furthermore, he has also extended his support to preschoolers 
by sponsoring a class during Christmas time, motivating and uplifting 
their young minds with toys and treats. Jaylen finds great satisfaction 
in nurturing the future leaders of his small town.
  With a deep commitment to giving back and caring for his community, 
Jaylen has decided to pursue nursing in his undergraduate studies in 
college. His ultimate goal is to continue his education in graduate 
school, aiming for a doctorate degree to make a significant impact on 
his community. Jaylen is driven and excited to be the best version of 
himself, striving to make his family, friends, and community proud. He 
firmly believes that nothing is impossible with faith and lives by the 
inspiring words of Philippians 4:13, ``I can do all things through 
Christ who strenghens me.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in acknowledging and 
celebrating the outstanding achievements of Jaylen Watson.
I rise today to honor Mr. Angelo K. 
Tsakopoulos upon receiving the American Hellenic Institution Hellenic 
Heritage Lifetime Achievement Award. Mr. Tsakopoulos is the founder, 
CEO, and co-chairman of AKT Development and has devoted his career to 
improving California for all.
  Born in Arcadia, Greece, Mr. Tsakopoulos first came to the United 
States at the age of 15. He worked diligently to send money home to his 
family in Greece and attended the University of Illinois and Sacramento 
State University, where he cultivated his passion for learning. In 
1964, he founded AKT Development, beginning what would become a 
lifetime of leadership in Californias residential and commercial 
development.

  Through his work with AKT Development, Mr. Tsakopoulos built entire 
communities, universities, and homes, helping California and its 
residents thrive. Since its founding, AKT Development has built over 
60,000 homes and today, it manages nearly 20,000 acres of farmland in 
Northern and Central California. Mr. Tsakopoulos critical work is 
characterized by his commitment to balancing the need for natural 
spaces with real estate development. His philosophy is simple: plant as 
many trees as possible and preserve the existing ones whenever 
possible.
, which is dedicated to 
protecting and growing the urban forest within Sacramento. His 
dedication to planting and preserving trees as both a developer and 
lifelong advocate will continue to benefit California for generations.
, generosity, and compassionate spirit 
have impacted the lives of countless members of his community and 
beyond. I join the American Hellenic Institution in honoring the 
critical contributions of Mr. Tsakopoulos.
I rise today in deep appreciation of Ms. 
Chloe Stemler for her service to the American people as a member of my 
staff.
2023 as an intern, having 
graduated from George Washington University. In June of 2023, she 
started her role of Press Assistant and, from day one, helped 
revitalize and significantly increase our online engagement. Many of my 
highest-performing social media posts occurred during her tenure, for 
which I am grateful. She raised the bar for my offices digital media 
and set an example I will hold my staff to for years to come.
  During her tenure on my staff, Ms. Stemler demonstrated an 
unfaltering work ethic and a high level of creativity. Whether it was 
taking videos or writing captions, she approached every task with 
enthusiasm and humor. She cared deeply for her colleagues and was 
always willing to lend a helping hand. These same qualities will serve 
her well in her future endeavors.
a new role as a Communications Associate 
at the Pew Charitable Trusts. Her contributions have left an indelible 
mark on my team, and I am confident that she will excel in her new 
position.
  While we will miss her deeply, we all look forward to Ms. Stemlers 
bright future. She will always remain a deeply valued member of Team 
Garamendi.
On April 9, 2024, page E313, in the third column, the following 
appeared: HONORING THE LIFE OF LIEUTENANT COMMANDER ISAAC L.
  
  The online version has been corrected to read: HONORING THE LIFE 
                               of kansas
I rise today to honor the life of 
Lieutenant Commander Issac L. Belton. Throughout his distinguished 
career, LCDR Belton demonstrated exceptional leadership and a tireless 
devotion to the defense of his Nation. His expertise and dedication 
were instrumental in shaping the next generation of naval personnel and 
ensuring the readiness of our forces.
  LCDR Beltons service to our country began with his enlistment in the 
United States Navy in 1988 following his high school graduation from 
Rosa Fort High School in Tunica, Mississippi. He served aboard various 
commands, including the USS Raleigh, USS Donald B. Beary, and USS 
Eisenhower, where he developed his skills as a Boiler Technician.

  In 2000, after twelve years of exemplary service as an enlisted 
sailor, LCDR Belton was commissioned as an Ensign. As a Naval Officer, 
he continued to serve with distinction aboard several vessels including 
the USS Saipan, USS Tortuga, USS John Paul Jones, and USS Kearsarge. 
His roles varied from Auxiliary Systems Officer to Main Propulsion 
Officer, showcasing his versatility and leadership abilities. His 
contributions extended beyond the confines of individual commands, as 
he served as a Training Center Administrator, Master Training 
Specialist, and Surface Warfare Officer, among other roles.
  After 28 years of honorable and dedicated service, LCDR Belton 
retired from active duty, but his work did not stop there. In 2018, 
LCDR Belton founded Course Correction LLC, a service-disabled veteran 
owned small business which specializes in financial literacy education, 
leadership training, and contract management. His legacy of excellence 
continues to inspire and guide those who follow in his footsteps.
  LCDR Belton passed away unexpectedly on February 12, 2024. In 
addition to his remarkable career, LCDR Beltons life was marked by 
love and commitment. Issac was married to Kansas City, Kansas native 
Lieutenant Commander Anjail Belton, also a retired Naval Officer. 
Together they have four adult children. They recently finalized the 
adoption of six of their grandchildren on December 20, 2023.
  It is with great pride and gratitude that I recognize the outstanding 
service and life of Lieutenant Commander Issac L. Belton. His numerous 
awards and decorations, including the Meritorious Service Medal, Navy 
Commendation Medal, and Combat Action Ribbon, attest to his exceptional 
valor and dedication. In his eyes, however, LCDR Beltons family was 
his greatest achievement.
  I ask my colleagues to join me in extending our heartfelt 
appreciation to LCDR Belton and his family for their sacrifices and 
service to our country. May his legacy serve as a shining example of 
honor, courage, and selfless dedication to duty for generations to 
come.
HONORING THE LIFE OF NATHANIEL ``RAY TUCK, JR.
I rise today to honor the life of 
Nathaniel ``Ray Tuck, Jr., who passed away at the age of 52 on 
February 11, 2024, after battling cancer for the past two and a half 
years.
  Ray was born in Roanoke, Virginia, on April 30, 1971, to Nathaniel 
Ray and Barbara Z. Tuck. He later graduated from Radford University in 
1994 and earned his Doctor of Chiropractic from the National University 
of Health Sciences in 1997. After graduating, he joined his fathers 
chiropractic clinic in Southwest Virginia where they practiced together 
for many years. His son, Nathaniel R. Tuck, III is currently in 
chiropractic school, hoping to continue the family legacy.
  During Rays incredible career, he served as the President of the 
Virginia Chiropractic Association, Chairman of the Board, and later 
President of the American Chiropractic Association, and was also 
appointed to be the chiropractor on the Virginia Board of Medicine.
  Ray is survived by his wife, Bonnie, of 29 years, his daughter Abi 
Dolgos (husband Dakota Dolgos and grandson Gatlin Dolgos), his son 
Nathaniel (girlfriend Abby E. Markham), his mother Barbara, his sister 
Amelia Martin (husband Buddy Martin), and his brother Ben M. Tuck (wife 
Priyam Chipper). I wish them peace and strength during this difficult 
time.
  I was lucky to know Ray personally, as my daughter, Abby, has dated 
his son Nathaniel for a number of years. He was a good man, and I was 
glad to have been able to know him before he passed. We will all 
greatly miss him.
HONORING THE LIFE OF SERVICE OF DR. WILLIAM ``BILL GREER
I rise today to honor Dr. William 
``Bill Greer, a distinguished leader, educator, and advocate for 
higher education who has announced his retirement as the 15th President 
of Milligan University. Dr. Greers exemplary tenure, spanning more 
than 13 years, is marked by significant transformation, growth, and 
achievement for Milligan University.
  A proud alumnus, Dr. Greer graduated from Milligan in 1985 and 
returned to his alma mater in 1994 as a Professor of Economics and 
Business. With a wealth of experience after a decade in the private 
sector, Dr. Greer led the institutions business initiative as the 
founding director of Milligans MBA program. His leadership as Vice 
President for Institutional Advancement was instrumental to the success 
of the ``Forward Ever campaign, raising $28 million for the 
university in its first phase of implementation.
  Since assuming the role of president in 2011, Dr. Greer has been a 
visionary, guiding Milligan University to unprecedented levels of 
achievement. Under his leadership, the university has received 
recognition as one of the Best Regional Universities and Best Values in 
the South. In 2020, Dr. Greer helmed the impressive modernization and 
expansion of 25 additional academic programs, elevating Milligans 
status from a college to a university.
  Dr. Greers presidency is highlighted by a series of significant 
accomplishments, including record enrollment, giving, and endowment 
growth. He presided over the integration of Emmanuel Christian 
Seminary, the establishment of Milligan Village, and the growth of 
multiple academic and athletic facilities. His efforts have 
significantly increased the universitys footprint to 355 acres and 
brought numerous national recognitions to Milligan.
  Additionally, Dr. Greers focus on Milligans mission as a premier, 
Christian liberal arts institution has resulted in the education and 
support of thousands of students, overseeing nearly 4,000 graduates 
under his tenure. Furthermore, his leadership during the COVID-19 
pandemic exemplified compassion and resilience, guiding the university 
through unprecedented challenges.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in honoring Dr. Bill 
Greer for his outstanding service to Milligan and our region. His 
retirement marks the end of an era of exceptional service and dynamic 
leadership. I am certain his legacy will continue to inspire current 
and future generations of Buffs. I wish him and his family all the best 
in his retirement and his continued service as Chancellor of Milligan 
University.
I rise today to recognize and honor the 
unique contributions of one of my constituents, Daniel Pritz, who 
serves as a volunteer Board Member for the local non-profit, 
Brooksville Main Street. These outstanding volunteers put in hundreds 
of hours while running their businesses and organizations.
  They have all come together for a common cause--to serve the 
community by bringing much-loved events to downtown Brooksville. Each 
of these board members have servant hearts, and their dedication and 
commitment to our community is impressive. Part of what makes our 
country so great is the willingness of ordinary Americans to go above 
and beyond to selflessly give back to others.
  Volunteerism is one of the cornerstones of our society and part of 
the fabric that unites us.
  It is clear that Daniel Pritz and fellow board members have made a 
profoundly positive impact on our community, and I am grateful for 
their service.
I rise today to recognize Dr. Courtney S. 
Lim, on the occasion of her 10 years of practicing medicine. Her 
continued dedication and service to her patients in Ann Arbor, Michigan 
is worthy of commendation.
  Dr. Courtney Lim attended the University of Michigan Medical School 
in 2008, then went on to complete her residency at the McGaw Medical 
Center at Northwestern University in 2012, earning a board 
certification for obstetrics and gynecology. Afterwards, she returned 
to Ann Arbor, where she continued her education through a fellowship, 
achieving a Focused Practice designation in Minimally Invasive 
Gynecologic Surgery in 2014 from the American Board of Obstetrics and 
Gynecology. Now practicing as Service Chief of Gynecology at the 
University of Michigans Von Voigtlander Womens Hospital in Ann Arbor, 
.
. She is open about her approach to health care 
and continuously strives to determine what the best course of action is 
for each individual. Dr. Lim truly listens to her patients and 
recommends a treatment plan that is best aligned with that patients 
values and wishes. Dr. Lim offers both medical and surgical treatment 
options and strives to be as minimally invasive as possible when it 
comes to surgery. In her work, Dr. Lim is conscientious, knowledgeable, 
and addresses even the smallest of concerns from her patients. She 
exemplifies the values of what it means to be an excellent caretaker 
and serves as a leader in her field of work.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in honoring Dr. Courtney 
S. Lim for her continued service to her patients. Dr. Lim conducts 
herself in a way that our future doctors should aspire to: thoughtfully 
listening to each and every patient, and serving as a steady, 
compassionate force for patients to find comfort with. I have no doubt 
she will continue to exhibit her dedication and genuine care in 
treatment for many years to come.
I rise today to recognize and honor the 
unique contributions made in our community by one of my constituents, 
Karen Epting. Ms. Eptings leadership at the YMCA of the Suncoast--
James P Gills Family Branch goes beyond mere titles; its rooted in 
her genuine passion for making a difference in the Pasco community. As 
Chair of the YMCA Branch Advisory Council for many years, she provided 
strategic guidance and rolled up her sleeves to actively participate in 
the branchs many initiatives and events. Her role as Campaign Chair 
for the YMCAs fundraising efforts in Pasco County underscores her 
ability to rally support and resources for vital programs and services.
  Her dedication ensures that the YMCA can continue its mission of 
serving the community effectively. Karens continued involvement in the 
YMCAs partnership with Feeding Tampa Bay reflects her compassionate 
response to urgent community needs. Karen helps oversee the 
distribution of food to over 130 families every two weeks. In this 
capacity she not only addresses immediate hunger but also fosters a 
sense of belonging and support within the community.
  Coordinating a team of 30 volunteers is no small feat, yet Karen does 
so gracefully and efficiently. She assists in recruiting and training 
volunteers and fosters a sense of camaraderie and purpose among them. 
Her hands-on approach during food pick-ups, where she personally 
welcomes each family and assists with intake procedures, demonstrates 
her commitment to serving others with dignity and respect. Karens 
advocacy for youth literacy is also a testament to her belief in the 
power of education to transform lives. By leading volunteer efforts for 
youth reading programs, she promotes literacy and instills a love for 
learning in young minds, empowering them to reach their full potential. 
During the holidays, Karens leadership shines brightly as she 
volunteers many hours to the YMCAs Seasons of Giving and Giving Tree 
programs, encouraging community members to spread joy and generosity by 
purchasing gifts for children in need. Her ability to inspire others to 
give back underscores her exceptional leadership and ability to 
mobilize resources for the greater good. Despite her preference for 
working behind the scenes, Karens impact reverberates throughout the 
YMCA and the community at large. Her selfless dedication and unwavering 
passion serve as a beacon of hope and inspiration, inspiring others to 
follow in her footsteps and make a positive difference in the world.
  It is clear that Ms. Epting has made a profoundly positive impact on 
our community, and I am grateful for her service.
I rise today to recognize the Saline 
Fiddlers Philharmonic, a premier youth fiddling show band from Saline, 
Michigan, on their 30th anniversary. Comprised of students from Saline 
High School the fiddlers present an energetic and polished show that 
features a diverse range of music from American folk, fiddle, 
bluegrass, jazz, western swing, and Celtic traditions. Their 30 years 
of unforgettable performances are remarkable, and their commitment and 
skill are worthy of commendation.
  The Fiddlers began in 1994 with the simple idea of introducing an 
alternative style of musical education to public school students to 
maintain and expand their interest in musical performance. Since 1994, 
these remarkable students have set the standard for extracurricular 
music programs in the United States and have become a model for 
instruction and motivation that other schools across the nation have 
added to their own programs.
  With over 1,500 performances in the majority of the states in our 
nation, the Fiddlers have a storied history that includes three 
performances at the White House, two performances on the Millennium 
Stage at the Kennedy Center, and a performance at the State of 
Michigans Presidential Inaugural Ball. The Fiddlers have also traveled 
to Canada and Europe for performances and have made multiple trips to 
Salines sister cities of Brecon, Wales and Lindenberg, Germany. Each 
year, the group performs 50-60 times, with around a third of their 
annual schedule being donated to community service events. I still 
fondly remember their performance at the Saline Celtic Festival this 
past summer.
  Working alongside the artistic team, the Saline Fiddlers help plan 
each aspect of their shows by crafting arrangements and making diverse 
organizational decisions that helps teach the students collaborative 
ownership while giving students the opportunity to explore their 
creativity and showcase their enthusiasm throughout the show making 
process. These accomplished members of the Fiddlers are selected 
through competitive auditions that assess their musical talent and 
personal maturity. They balance academics, school organizations, jobs, 
and other extracurricular activities. Teaching students not just about 
music but about maintaining a balanced schedule and workload is a true 
testament to how the Saline Fiddlers Philharmonic has helped 30 years 
of students prepare for their futures through music.
, I ask my colleagues to join me today in recognizing the 
Saline Fiddlers Philharmonic on their 30th anniversary. Their 
commitment to music and community is an incredible accomplishment and 
has helped preserve music and tradition for future generations. I 
cannot wait to see all they accomplish in the years to come.