Mr Speaker, I rise today to honor Captain 
Billy Richard Inman, Jr., as he celebrates his 32 years of service with 
the Lake County Fire Protection District and our community.
  Captain Inman was born in Santa Rosa, California, on December 8, 
1968. He grew up in Covelo and Corning before moving to Lake County. In 
1985, he married his high school sweetheart, Pam, and soon thereafter 
welcomed two children, Jessica, and Billy IV. He and his wife have 
since expanded their family by welcoming nine grandchildren. Captain 
Inman obtained his General Education Diploma in 1987 and then took fire 
science courses to start his career.
  Captain Inman began his service as a seasonal firefighter for South 
Lake County Fire. He then became a volunteer firefighter for the 
Lakeshore Fire Department Volunteer Association and a volunteer captain 
for the Lakeshore/Lake County Fire Volunteer Association. Later in his 
career, he became a firefighter for Lakeshore/Lake County Fire as well 
as a firefighter and emergency medical technician for Lakeshore/Lake 
County Fire. After, he served as the Fire Captain for Lake County Fire 
Protection District.
  Since the beginning of his career in the fire service, Captain Inman 
has aimed to give back to our community. Currently, serving as a 
captain and training officer for the Lake County Fire Protection 
District. Captain Inman has tirelessly worked to embody the mission of 
the Lake County Fire Protection District, which is to protect all its 
citizens from injuries and loss due to both manmade and natural fires.
  Captain Inmans service on behalf of our Lake County community is 
inspiring. In addition to his dedicated work to combat fires, he also 
works closely with youth. This includes working to restore fire damage, 
inspecting car seats, operating fire safety trailers, coaching youth 
sports teams, and supporting local school activities with his 
attendance and generous donations. Captain Inman has shown an immense 
commitment to the safety and health of our community.
  For the past 32 years, Captain Inman has given countless hours to our 
community that have not gone unnoticed. He has dedicated his life to 
both his biological family, fire family, and our Lake County community 
over the duration of his long and storied career. We are grateful for 
his leadership in our community.

We are thankful for his service and wish Captain Inman a wonderful 
retirement.
  Mr Speaker, Captain Inman is deeply appreciated for his work on 
behalf of our community. Therefore, it is fitting and proper that we 
honor him here today.
I rise today to honor Howard 
Haupt, an esteemed member of our community. Mr Haupt is being honored 
at this years military academy reception for his dedication to our 
armed forces.
, Wisconsin. He married his wife, 
Phyllis, in Kansas in 1962. They have been Napa residents for 28 years 
and have three sons and four grandchildren. Mr. Haupt is a 1957 
graduate of West Point and served in the United States Army and Air 
Force for 27 years, attaining a rank of Lieutenant Colonel.
Upon his 
commissioning during the Cold War, he served as a crewmember on a 
bomber throughout the 1960s. During the Vietnam War, he served as a 
navigator on KC-135 refueling aircraft, spending most of his time doing 
so stationed in temporary duty in Okinawa. During this time, he also 
served as a mission coordinator on EC-47 electronic reconnaissance 
aircraft. Our country is safer because of the courage and sacrifice Mr. 
Haupt has shown throughout his long career.
  After retiring from the military in 1984, Mr Haupt was employed as a 
financial planner, where he worked for about five years. Later, he 
taught at the junior high and high school levels for nine more years. 
His dedication to serving his community both in and out of uniform is 
honorable.
  Even after his official retirement, Mr. Haupt continues to serve his 
country. He has conducted admissions outreach for the U.S. Military 
Academy at West Point for the North Bay Region for thirty years. He has 
also served as my Academy Nomination Coordinator, where he has led my 
nomination panel and helped to nominate dozens of young men and women 
dedicated to serving our country. His level of detail to support our 
nations future leaders is commendable.
-
inspiring. He has been an active member of the Napa Sunrise Rotary 
club, where he works heavily in their youth and educational programs. 
We are grateful for his leadership in our community.
, we thank Mr. Haupt for his dedicated service to our 
military and our broader Napa County community. Therefore, it is 
fitting and proper that we honor him here today.
I rise today to honor NiKolas Rogers on 
being named the 2024 Youth of the Year at the Boys and Girls Clubs of 
Greater Tarrant County. NiKolas has consistently demonstrated 
exceptional leadership, dedication, and commitment to excellence that 
truly sets him apart, making him a deserving recipient of this 
prestigious honor.
  NiKolas has shown an unwavering passion for academic success and 
personal growth. His involvement in Upward Bound has not only enriched 
his own life but also positively impacted those around him. He has a 
unique ability to inspire his peers and lead by example, always 
striving to make our community a better place.
  As a student at Trimble Tech High School, NiKolas excels, maintaining 
high grades and a strong commitment to his education. He approaches 
every challenge with determination and a positive attitude, embodying 
the values of hard work and perseverance. His intellectual curiosity 
and eagerness to learn are truly commendable.
  NiKolas is also willing to lend a helping hand at any time and offer 
support to those in need. His genuine concern for others and his 
ability to connect with people on a personal level make him a beloved 
member of Upward Bound and our community in Tarrant County.
, please join me today in congratulating NiKolas Rogers on 
receiving this award and in wishing him all the best in his future 
endeavors.
I rise today to honor Ray 
Johnson, the Executive Director of the Wine Business Institute. Mr. 
Johnsons contributions to the wine community, both locally and beyond, 
exemplify a commitment to excellence and leadership.
a Bachelor of Arts degree from the University of 
Pittsburgh, and a Masters in Wine Business from the University of 
Adelaide.
, 
during which he has tirelessly worked to elevate the visibility and 
viability of the Wine Business Institute at Sonoma State University in 
Sonoma County, California. Since assuming the role of Executive 
Director in 2010, Mr. Johnson has spearheaded initiatives that have 
propelled the department to new heights, generating millions of dollars 
in support for its students, faculty, and programs. His visionary 
leadership and strategic acumen have been instrumental in shaping the 
future of wine education and business.
  Beyond his professional career, Mr. Johnsons passion for wine runs 
deep. While working at a French restaurant in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, 
he discovered his love for wine and embarked on a transformative career 
path that led him to California. Mr. Johnsons journey from a tour 
guide at Christian Brothers to the helm of the Wine Business Institute 
is a testament to his unwavering determination and dedication to his 
craft.
  What sets Mr. Johnson apart is not only his expertise in wine 
education and business but also his commitment to sharing his knowledge 
and passion with others. Through his work at the Wine Business 
Institute, Ray has empowered countless individuals to pursue their 
passions and unlock their full potential in the wine community. His 
belief in the transformative power of education is evident in every 
aspect of his work, from the classroom to the boardroom.
  His dedication to education culminated in the launch of the Executive 
Wine MBA program in 2012, the first of its kind in the nation. 
Additionally, Mr. Johnson played a pivotal role in founding the Sonoma 
State Wine Cellars, which provides students with invaluable hands-on 
experience in the wine community.
, we thank Mr. Johnson for his dedicated service to the 
wine community. His passion, leadership, and unwavering commitment to 
education have left an indelible mark on us all. Therefore, it is 
fitting and proper that we honor him here today.
I rise today to honor Rear 
Admiral James Bernard, Jr., who was an esteemed member of our 
community. Mr. Greene is being laid to rest today in Arlington National 
Cemetery with full military honors.
  Admiral Greene was born on June 6, 1941, in New Brunswick, New 
Jersey. He marrried his first wife, Diane, in 1964, and had four 
children. After his first wife died, he married his second wife, Susan, 
in 2005, and welcomed three stepchildren and countless step-
grandchildren into his life. He received a Bachelor of Science from 
Brown University, and a Master of Science in both Electrical 
Engineering and Management from the Naval Post Graduate School in 
Monterey.
  Admiral Greenes long career in the military is commendable. After 
joining the ROTC at Brown from 1959 to 1964, he was commissioned into 
the U.S. Navy, where he served in active duty from 1964 to 1995. Even 
after retirement from active duty, he continued his service in the 
military by working at the Naval Post Graduate School as a Professor of 
the Practice and Chair of Acquisition, where he helped to launch and 
serve as Director of the Acquisition Research Program.
  His service on behalf of the military did not end there. He served as 
the Director of the Liaison for the Office of Legislative Affairs where 
he worked to recommission battleships. He also worked on the 7B 
Maritime Prepositioning Ship Program and served as the Project Manager 
for the Aegis Ship Building Project. He also served as the senior 
military Chief of Staff to the Under Secretary of Navy for Acquisition, 
Research and Development. His commitment to the military both in active 
service and in retirement was commendable.
  Admiral Greene also had a long history of community outreach and 
service. He served as the Chair of Henrys Fork Foundation in Ashland, 
Idaho, and as founder and sponsor of the Rear Admiral Greene Colgate 
Internship. He also served on the board of the American Chestnut Land 
Trust in Maryland, and advised other environmental organizations, such 
as the Teton Regional Land Trust and the Tuolumne River Land Trust. His 
active involvement in countless environmental organizations revealed 
the depth of his dedication

to preserving public lands for future generations.
  Admiral Greenes dedication to serving his community was evident 
throughout his life. His ability to bring people together to work 
towards a common goal never failed to bring success. People knew that 
if they worked with him, they would be working with a competent and 
exceptionally knowledgeable leader. He also had an unconditional love 
for his family, which shone through in every interaction.
, we thank Admiral Greene for his dedicated service to our 
military and our broader community. Therefore, it is fitting and proper 
that we honor his life and legacy here today.
today I want to recognize the South Redford 
School District as they celebrate the grand opening of their Innovation 
Center.
  The Innovation Center proudly offers new programming for building 
trades, culinary paths, welding, health professions, and hospitality. 
This new programming will open innumerable doors to so many students 
within the district, ensuring that they find what fits their passions.
  The Center is also equipped to ensure that its students have the 
needed career preparatory skills to succeed after graduation. These 
skills include the creation of an Educational Development Plan, 
apprenticeship programs, and paid or non-paid internships. 
Additionally, the Center works to guide its students into any path they 
choose to embark on. This means that they put an important focus on 
aiding their employability or assisting them with navigating post-
secondary institutions.
  Please join me and the 12th Congressional District in celebrating the 
opening of Redford School Districts Innovation Center and the 
subsequent launch of their newest programming.
I rise today in honor of Holocaust 
Survivor Day. On June 4th, we come together to celebrate the survivors 
for their bravery, sacrifices, and lives.
  Holocaust survivors are our teachers, and it is our collective 
responsibility to pass on the legacy of their testimonies.
  I would like to recognize and honor the following survivors Frances 
Gaspar, 103 years old; Chaim Greenberg, 102 years old; Lucy Blicker, 
102 years old; Elaine Lefkowitz, 101 years old; Hana Altarac, 104 years 
old; Allan Feld, 105 years old; Rena Reiter, 101 years old; Rosa 
Lindenberg, 100 years old; Rose Boyarsky, 100 years old; Herman Haller, 
100 years old; Betty Eisdorfer, 100 years old; Estelle Dreese, 100 
years old; David Elefant, 100 years old; Miriam Rozenbaum, 100 years 
old; and Lena Porter, 100 years old.
, on behalf of Floridas 23rd Congressional District, 
please Join me in commemorating Holocaust Survivor Day. May their 
stories be forever remembered.
today I want to recognize Caribbean American 
Heritage Month to celebrate the contributions of Caribbean-Americans to 
Michigans 12th Congressional District and all across our Nation.
  National Caribbean American Heritage Month was first recognized in 
2005. This was the culmination of many years of efforts by 
organizations around the world to spotlight the numerous contributions 
to our Nation. Caribbean Community Services, a nonprofit organization 
based in Detroit, Michigan, has proudly uplifted that history. They 
routinely host numerous events that celebrate the rich cultural 
heritage of the Caribbean and its impact on our communities in 
southeastern Michigan. I am incredibly proud of the important work 
Caribbean Social Services undertakes to foster diverse and welcoming 
communities. I especially want to highlight their leadership in 
ensuring these contributions are recognized and valued as we celebrate 
Caribbean American Heritage Month.
  Please join me in recognizing National Caribbean American Heritage 
Month and the contributions of Caribbean Americans across our Nation 
and the 12th Congressional District.
I rise today to recognize an 
outstanding constituent from my district, Rebecca Smirk whose work and 
dedication as an outstanding Girl Scout Volunteer, Leader and Service 
Unit Manager has touched many lives in the Lower Bucks County region 
and the surrounding areas over the span of twelve years.
  A seventeen-year resident of Bucks County, Pennsylvania, Rebecca grew 
up in Long Island, New Yolk and attended Swarthmore College. She 
graduated with a BA in Chemistry and Economics in 2000 and from Seton 
Hall University School of Law with a JD in Intellectual Property in 
2009. She is currently a Partner at Servilla Whitney, LLC.
  While her career accomplishments are impressive on their own, her 
greatest impact has been within her own community. Rebecca and her 
husband Jim moved to the Yardley/Lower Makefield community in 2007 and 
welcomed their daughter Emma in 2005. Growing up as a Girl Scout, she 
knew that she wanted to give her daughter the experiences she loved as 
a scout--outdoor adventure, leadership skills and lifelong friendships.
  Rebecca understood the importance of volunteerism from her own mother 
who was her troop leader for 9 years. When Emma joined scouts in 2012 
as a Daisy, Rebecca was quick to volunteer as a parent helper. When the 
troops leaders stepped down in 2015, Rebecca immediately stepped in. 
She knew they would be creating treasured scouting memories, just like 
the ones Rebecca had of her mother.
  In June of 2018, Rebecca again stepped up her volunteering and became 
the Service Unit Manager for the Sandy Run Service Unit within the Girl 
Scouts of Eastern Pennsylvania Council. In this role, she oversees 
nearly 40 troops, over 80 troop leaders, a Service Unit Team, and over 
400 active, registered Girl Scouts. Under her leadership, she has 
increased girl enrollment, increased the number of girls achieving 
higher awards, promoted Outdoor skills education, fostered 
relationships with community members and community service groups like 
Aid for Friends as well as forming new relationships with Trenton Area 
Soup Kitchen and the Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania.
  Additionally, Rebecca built upon the Service Unit activities and 
traditions. Rebecca has been a driving force behind the continued 
success of our Sandy Run Service Unit Summer Day Camp which draws 100 
girls each year from the Service Unit and neighboring towns. She has 
expanded and built a community of parents, volunteers, and community 
leaders who have worked together to build girls with courage, 
confidence, and character.
  Rebecca has been a champion for girl-led leadership opportunities 
within the Service Unit. She has gone above and beyond in her service 
to ensure every girl who wanted to belong to a Girl Scout troop is 
included. Girls from disbanded troops or former Juliette Scouts were 
included by welcoming them into her own established older girl troop.
  Rebeccas welcoming hand ensured these girls remained active in Girl 
Scouting and many went on to achieve Silver and Gold Awards through her 
encouragement. When 23 little kindergartners needed a leader so they 
could join Girl Scouts, Rebecca again stepped in to become the leader 
of a new Daisy troop while still helping guide her older girls towards 
graduation.
  In 2023, Rebecca received the Gertrude K. McGonigle Award, which 
recognizes one individual a year from Girl Scouts of Eastern 
Pennsylvanias nine county footprint who has been a registered Girl 
Scout volunteer for a minimum of ten years, has proven to be a positive 
role model while working directly with girls, and has exemplified the 
values and traditions of Girl Scouting. The award is given in honor of 
Gertrude K. McGonigle by her daughter, in recognition of her mothers 
long-standing interest and support of Girl Scouting in the Reading/
Berks County area. Rebecca has positively impacted and inspired 
numerous volunteers as well as hundreds of girls within our community.
  The hours she has dedicated to her two troops and to our Unit are 
countless and her initiative and creativity providing a rich Girl 
Scouts experience to all of our scouts is limitless. Rebeccas ability 
to live a life of service and a dedication to the Girl Scout Law is 
commendable. She is a role model to many and exemplifies the values and 
traditions of Girl Scouting.
  We are all incredibly grateful for the positive impact Rebecca Smirk 
has had through her volunteer work and we are delighted that she will 
be taking on a new volunteer role as a Girl Scout Gold Award Committee 
Member with the Girl Scouts of Eastern Pennsylvania Council continuing 
to inspire the young women in Bucks, Berks, Carbon, Chester, Delaware, 
Lehigh, Montgomery, Northampton, and Philadelphia Counties.
RECOGNIZING REVEREND DR. YVONNE KAYE DEDICATION AND CONTRIBUTION AS A 
                            of pennsylvania
I rise today to recognize an 
extraordinary individual from my district, Reverend Dr. Yvonne Kaye, 
whose dedication and contributions as a mental health professional have 
profoundly impacted the Bucks County region and beyond for over five 
decades.
. She furthered her education by earning degrees from 
Marywood University and Columbia Pacific University in Thanatology.
  Throughout her illustrious career, Dr. Kaye has been a beacon of hope 
and support for those navigating the challenges of grief. In 
collaboration with Dr. Larry Schmitzer, she championed Triumph, an 
organization dedicated to instilling hope among individuals in the 
medical and education sectors.
. For 
eighteen years, she hosted the Dr. Yvonne Kaye Show on WWDB radio, 
providing a platform for individuals to engage in meaningful 
conversations and receive invaluable guidance on various life 
challenges.
  The unwavering support of her partner of twenty-seven years, John 
Roberts, played a pivotal role in Dr. Kayes journey. Although John is 
no longer with us, his influence continues to inspire her work and 
dedication to serving others.
. Her involvement with the Cancer Support Community at Gildas 
Club in Warminster since its inception in 2003 underscores her enduring 
commitment to supporting those in need.
  Dr. Yvonne Kayes multifaceted contributions as a mother, 
grandmother, storyteller, writer, published author, thanatologist, 
humorist, and former radio show personality reflect her profound 
dedication to uplifting and enriching the lives of others.
  Her resilience, empathy, and unwavering commitment to the well-being 
of our community are truly commendable. Dr. Kayes work in bereavement, 
particularly with families who have lost children, serves as a 
testament to her compassion and dedication to healing.
  In recognition of her outstanding service and positive impact, we 
extend our deepest gratitude to Dr. Yvonne Kaye. May she continue to 
inspire and uplift those around her for years to come.
RECOGNIZING SOLEBURY TOWNSHIP POLICE CHIEF DOMINICK P. BELLIZZIES 
                            of pennsylvania
I rise today to recognize an 
outstanding constituent of my district, Solebury Police Chief Dominick 
P. Bellizzie who is retiring on July 1, 2024 after 48 years of 
dedicated and faithful service to the citizens of Southeastern 
Pennsylvania.
  After high school, Dominick joined the United States Navy where he 
served prior to his law enforcement career. He found his lifelong 
career on May 17, 1975 when he started as a police officer at the City 
of Philadelphia Police Department, working in patrol, investigations, 
administration, and narcotics.
  Dominick has had extensive police training, including the Federal 
Bureau of Investigation National Academy in Quantico, Virginia. Chief 
Bellizzie was also selected by the International Association of Chiefs 
of Police to travel abroad to Ukraine to provide training in police 
methods.
  In 2002, Chief Bellizzie became the Chief of Police for the City of 
Coatesville Police Department in Chester County, Pennsylvania. He left 
Coatesville Police Department in 2006 to lead the Solebury Township 
Police Department. Under the leadership of Chief Dominick Bellizzie, 
the Solebury Township Police Department was transformed from a pre-21st 
century department to an innovative community-based police department. 
The principles of leadership, service, honesty, integrity, humility, 
purpose, and trust were part of Dominicks devotion to law enforcement 
and his officers.
  I wish to congratulate Dominick on his almost five decades of service 
to the citizens of Bucks, Chester, and Philadelphia Counties, and on 
his well-deserved retirement from the Solebury Township Police 
Department.
I rise today to recognize Ms. Emilia 
McGovern, the first-place winner of the prestigious Pathfinder 
Scholarship in the Business category. This scholarship is awarded to 
Palm Beach and Martin County students who have displayed excellence in 
their academic and communal endeavors in a multitude of categories.
  Emilias academic journey is a testament to her dedication and 
passion. She earned an AICE Diploma with Distinction from Cambridge 
University and College Board Hispanic Recognition, showcasing her 
academic prowess. Her leadership role in her high schools Marketing 
Academy and her commendable performance in DECA competitions, where she 
secured the 5th position in the state for Marketing Communications, 
demonstrate her commitment to her community. Her aspiration to pursue a 
degree in public relations to become a social media manager is a 
reflection of her forward-thinking mindset and her desire to make a 
positive impact.
, please join me today to recognize Ms. Emilia McGovern as 
an excellent student and notable contributor to the field of business.
I rise today to honor Mr. Joshua Martoma, 
a beacon of inspiration and the recipient of the prestigious Silver 
Knight Award in the social science discipline. This award, a testament 
to his exceptional academic prowess and remarkable community service, 
is bestowed upon high school students in Broward and Miami-Dade County.
  Joshua is a shining example of turning adversity into triumph. His 
father served time in federal prison during Joshuas youth, which 
inspired him to cofound the nonprofit KidsMates alongside his two 
younger siblings. To assist children who also grew up with a family 
member who was incarcerated. His organization donated over 5,000 books, 
games, and movies to federal prison rooms, reaching prisons in 23 
states. He is passionate about informing the public of this crisis, and 
his essay titled ``Parental Incarceration Is a Silent American Epidemic 
More Common Than Childhood Asthma addresses this issue. His essay 
placed him in the Top 11 winners of The Learning Networks 10th Annual 
Student Editorial contest and was published in the New York Times.
, please join me in recognizing Mr. Joshua Martomas 
remarkable achievements, exceptional contributions to the discipline of 
social science, and unwavering commitment to making a positive 
difference in our community.
I rise today to honor Ms. Sophie 
Whiteside, a truly exceptional individual who has been bestowed with 
the Silver Knight Award in the speech discipline. This award, a symbol 
of academic excellence and community service, is a testament to 
Sophies outstanding achievements and her significant contributions to 
her community. It recognizes her dedication, talent, and the positive 
impact she has made in the lives of others.
  Sophies intelligence and eloquence can be seen in her success as a 
two-time Tournament of Champions Bid Earner for debate. Her dedication 
is displayed through her participation in twenty national-level speech 
and debate tournaments, and her talent led her to place sixth in the 
State of Florida for policy debate by the National Speech and Debate 
Organization. She has also been a beacon of kindness to the elderly 
community, as she was inspired to establish the Sending Sunshine Pine 
Crest Chapter in 2021 in honor of her grandmother, who passed away 
after suffering from dementia in her later years. Through this 
nonprofit, she has worked tirelessly alongside her team of 260 members 
to make the elderly feel appreciated by sending over 5,300 handwritten 
letters to local and international senior homes.
, please join me in recognizing Ms. Sophie Whiteside as a 
remarkable student and exceptional contributor to the discipline of 
speech.