I rise today to celebrate Pastor Dwayne R. 
Gillison, Sr., as he receives the Community Leadership Award from the 
Mary B. Talbert Civic and Cultural Club, Inc. Pastor Gillisons 
devotion to his faith and public service will be recognized at the 
116th Empire State Federation of Womens Clubs Convention.
  Pastor Gillison is a proud graduate of the State University of New 
York Brockport, the Bible College of Rochester, and the Houghton 
Christian Academy. In 2022, Pastor Gillison was elevated to Pastor of 
Mount Olive Baptist Church in Buffalo. In his ministry, Pastor Gillison 
has led the construction of the Mount Olive Senior Manor, an affordable 
housing community for seniors on the East Side of Buffalo. Working with 
People Inc., the complex will provide 65 accessible housing units to 
seniors in need.

  Beyond his pastoral work, Pastor Gillison is committed to serving his 
community in all capacities. Through his leadership with the Concerned 
Clergy Coalition, the Baptist Ministers Conference of Buffalo &amp; 
Vicinity, and the Urban Think Tank, Pastor Gillison is a guiding figure 
in the community. Further, Pastor Gillison leads the Mount Olive 
Development Corporation, a non-profit organization founded by his late 
father, Pastor William Gillison. With the Mount Olive Development 
Corporation, Pastor Gillison provides resources for families on 
Buffalos East Side to address their economic, social, and educational 
needs. Pastor Gillison established the Buffalo Raiders Little League 
Football team, a safe place for youth to participate in healthy 
programming.
  Today, Pastor Gillison is a loving husband to his wife, Victoria, 
father of three, and grandfather of three. He continues to unify our 
community through his devotion to faith and commitment to service. 
Please join me in congratulating Pastor Dwayne R. Gillison, Sr. for 
receiving the Community Leadership Award and thanking him for his 
remarkable dedication to our community.
I rise today to commend Memphis Public Works 
Director Robert Knecht who is retiring from the City of Memphis after 
23 years of making it a safer and more attractive place. Mr. Knecht is 
a hard-working and outstanding public servant who always had time to 
answer my questions about federal funding for city projects or how 
securing federal funding could advance the citys infrastructure needs, 
a quality invaluable to me as the Congressman representing Memphis. Mr. 
Knecht concentrated his efforts on the full Public Works portfolio 
including stormwater and wastewater operations, blight remediation, 
Code Enforcement, environmental enforcement, sustainability, street 
sweeping and street maintenance operations, and the results are to his 
credit. My staff and I worked closely with Mr. Knecht as we realized 
the $41 million Big River Crossing project, which included improvements 
on downtown Memphis Main Street from Uptown to the Harahan Bridge and 
the conversion of the vehicle sections of the bridge into a bike/
pedestrian path. This project was made possible by $15 million in 
federal funds I secured through the Transportation Investment 
Generating Economic Recovery (TIGER IV) Grant as well as matching 
grants from state and local funds and private funds. Mr. Knecht was 
instrumental in helping to execute Community Project Funding I secured 
for projects such as developing the Memphis Cobblestone Landing 
Recreational Center, which received $4 million. I have also worked 
closely with him to secure district projects in the past several Water 
Resources Development Acts, including provisions to deauthorize the 
Wolf River to create a lake adjacent to the historic downtown Snuff 
District and to accommodate a floating entertainment dock at 
Cobblestone Landing. A graduate of the University of Memphis with a 
Bachelor of Science degree in Civil Engineering (2003), he also has a 
Master of Business Administration (2008) from the University of 
Phoenix. A veteran of the U.S. Air Force, he served during Desert 
Storm/Desert Shield. Married to Memphis native Mandy, he and his three 
children have bright days ahead as he heads for an opportunity in the 
private sector. As Mayor Paul Young has said, his shoes will be hard to 
fill. His has been a job well done.
HONORING EDGAR ``EDDIE PETER GUARALDI OF BROCKTON, MASSACHUSETTS ON 
                            of massachusetts
I rise today in honor of Edgar ``Eddie 
Peter Guaraldi, in recognition of his 100th birthday and with the 
deepest appreciation for his courageous service to our Nation during 
World War II and his many contributions to the Brockton community.
  Eddie was born in Bourne, Massachusetts on June 29, 1924, to John and 
Angelina Zambelli. Along with his siblings Yober ``Bert, Yolanda, and 
Lillian Guaraldi, Eddie lived in Bourne and Springfield before moving 
to Brockton. He graduated from Brockton High School in 1941 and worked 
at a shipyard for ten months before enlisting in the United States 
Army.
  Eddie served his country with pride and distinction from March 1942 
to December 1945 as a Sergeant and member of the 296th Combat Engineer 
Battalion, Company C. He fought in five major battles, including the 
Battle of Normandy, Battle of the Bulge, and battles in northern 
France, Rhineland, and Central Europe. Mr. Guaraldi landed on Omaha 
Beach during the Normandy Landings on D-Day and was part of the 
liberation of Buchenwald--courageous acts that later earned him the 
European Campaign Medal and the French Legion of Honour Medal.
  Eddie met the love of his life, Rose Marie Altieri on New Years Eve 
in 1947. They married in Brockton on October 12, 1950. The couple 
raised two sons, E. Peter Guaraldi, Jr. and John Joseph Guaraldi. Eddie 
and Marie doted on their grandson, Peter James Guaraldi, throughout his 
childhood.
  After his service, Mr. Guaraldi attended school to be a radio and 
electronic technician, eventually getting a job at Central Radio in 
Brockton. There, he fixed televisions and installed antennae, with the 
desire to open his own business. In 1951, that dream came true as Eddie 
opened Community Television in Brockton, running the family business 
for 44 years before working part-time alongside his eldest son until 
the age of 80.
  Eddie was very involved in the South Shore and Brockton communities. 
For decades, he was a longtime volunteer and communicant at his local 
church Our Lady of Lourdes Church in Brockton. His volunteering at the 
Brockton Kids Road Races at D.W. Field Park for nearly 15 years helped 
make a positive impact on thousands of children and aspiring athletes. 
a regular at various veterans meetings and 
events hosted by the Brockton VA Medical Center, and the Whitman 
Veterans of Foreign War Post, among others.
  He and Marie were known for their love of travel, visiting many 
places around the world, including Europe, China, Japan, and South 
America.
  Eddie is a man of many hobbies and talents, particularly his ability 
to repair electronics, appliances, and anything else his family needs 
fixing. He looks forward to supporting his favorite team, the New 
England Patriots, every Sunday during football season.
, Edgar ``Eddie Peter Guaraldis legacy is one of 
committed service to his country, and his community, and most 
importantly, his family. It is my distinct privilege to join Mr. 
Guaraldis family and friends in recognizing his 100th birthday and to 
thank him for his service on behalf of a grateful Nation.
I rise today to honor and celebrate 
Wacker Chemical of Eddyville, Iowa. Wacker Chemical established its 
Eddyville plant in 1999 and recently celebrated its 25th anniversary.
  Wacker Chemical has been at the forefront of cyclodextrin production 
since it was first built. The Eddyville plant plays a central role 
within our global network of Biotech and Biopharma sites.
  From Iowa alone, Wacker produces all the cyclodextrin it sells. 
Eddyville is an important pillar of the BioSolutions portfolio and 
Wackers growth strategy.
  I extend my sincerest congratulations to Wacker Chemical on a 
tremendous 25 years of business in Iowa and honor its dedication to 
manufacturing for Iowans.
, I invite my colleagues to join me in congratulating 
Wacker Chemical of Eddyville, Iowa for its 25th anniversary. I wish 
nothing but the best as they continue their great work in Iowa.
I rise today to honor the life and service of 
Jonathan Delagrave. Jonathan served as the County Executive of Racine 
County from April 2015 until his sudden passing on June 28th.
  Jonathan, a lifelong resident of Racine County, was a beloved figure 
in his community. He served Racine County both as an elected official 
and a civil servant. He began as the Town Chairman and later Village 
President of Caledonia. Jonathan then worked in the Racine County Human 
Services Department, becoming Director in 2010. He was first elected as 
Racine County Executive in 2015. His popularity was reflected in his 
reelections as County Executive in 2019 and 2023, a testament to his 
leadership and the communitys trust in him.
  Jonathan constantly worked to make Racine County the best it could 
be. He focused on spurring economic growth and workforce development by 
forging partnerships between local, state, and private entities to 
benefit all residents. He championed mental health and fought to expand 
access to these critical services in Racine County. Jonathans 
dedication to improving the lives of people in Racine County was 
evident. I was honored to work together with Jonathan on efforts to 
preserve our Great Lakes community harbors.
  As many of us in Racine County know, Jonathan was a true Wisconsinite 
at heart. He was an avid fan of Wisconsin Badgers football and 
encouraged those who attended his funeral to wear their favorite 
Badgers attire. He also established a scholarship in his memory to 
provide student-athletes with mental health care.
  Most importantly, Jonathan was deeply devoted to his family, and a 
great friend to me and many others. Jonathan is survived by his son 
Maguire and daughter Makenzy. I offer my condolences to his family 
during this difficult time. Jonathan will be missed.
unfortunately, I had to miss votes on 
July 9, 2024. Had I been present, I would have voted NAY on Roll Call 
No. 338; NAY on Roll Call No. 339; YEA on Roll Call No. 340; NAY on 
Roll Call No. 341; YEA on Roll Call No. 342; and NAY on Roll Call No. 
343.
RECOGNIZING COL. ANDREW L. LIPUTS OUTSTANDING SERVICE TO THE UNITED 
                             of new jersey
this week in New Jersey at 
Joint Base McGuire-Dix-Lakehurst, Colonel Andrew L. Liput, Commander of 
the New Jersey Wing of the Civil Air Patrol, will receive a 
Presidential Lifetime Achievement and Volunteer Service Award, 
recognizing his outstanding commitment to volunteerism and his 
remarkable 10 years of service to our country in the Civil Air Patrol.
  Sworn in as the 24th Commander of the New Jersey Wing of the Civil 
Air Patrol on July 10, 2021, Col. Liput is a three-generation Civil Air 
Patrol family member. National service and volunteerism runs in their 
blood.
  Col. Liputs father, Andrew Liput Sr. served in the Pennsylvania Wing 
during World War II as a submarine spotter on the East Coast and was 
awarded the Congressional Gold Medal for his contributions to the 
American war effort in defense of the homeland. Col. Liputs daughter, 
Sloane Liput, was a member of the Picatinny Composite Squadron form 
2015-2018 and achieved the rank of C/SMSGT before beginning her studies 
at Rutgers University on an ROTC scholarship. The Liput familys 
commitment to service to our nation in the Civil Air Patrol represents 
the best attributes of volunteerism and civic engagement.
  Col. Liput previously served at the squadron, wing, region, and 
national staff levels where, among other achievements of distinction--
including the Civil Air Patrol Meritorious Service Award--he was named 
National Government Relations Officer of the Year for 2020 by CAP 
Commanding Officer Maj Gen Mark Smith. Col. Liputs tenure as Commander 
of the New Jersey Wing, has brought the NJWG to the forefront of the 
Civil Air Patrols mission and has led to new initiatives to modernize 
the Wing and connect them to the community, including key strategic 
partnerships with the NFL Alumni Association and the National Law 
Enforcement Against Drugs organizations to offer new opportunities 
through the national cadet program.
  With its roots in World War II, the Civil Air Patrol is a Total Force 
partner and serves as the United States Air Force Auxiliary, prepared 
to answer the call to search for and find the lost, provide comfort in 
times of disaster, and work to keep the homeland safe. It provides a 
proving ground for the next generation of American pilots through its 
Cadet program--many of whom continue their service to our Nation in the 
Armed Forces--while promoting aviation and the fields of aerospace and 
STEM. Through his distinguished term of service in the Civil Air 
Patrol, Col. Liput has enriched the national cadet program and ensured 
continued engagement of Americas future leaders in the fields of 
aviation and aerospace technology.
  The Volunteer Service Award that Col. Liput receives is a 
presidential citation that honors Americans who have served more than 
5000 hours in support of their community and nation and is a well-
deserved recognition of Col. Liputs leadership, commitment to civic 
engagement, to the State of New Jersey, and the United States of 
America.
  A graduate of Drew University in Madison, New Jersey and Fordham Law 
School, Col. Liput enjoyed a distinguished career as a corporate and 
banking attorney for more than 25 years and is a successful 
entrepreneur, currently employed as the Founder, President, and CEO of 
Secure Insight, a financial services and technology company. While 
establishing a successful career in law, Col. Liput continued his 
familys tradition of service to our nation by joining the Civil Air 
Patrol, serving throughout the Northeast before his appointment as 
Commander of the NJWG.
  During his time of service and as Commander of the NJWG, Col. Liput 
has embodied the Civil Air Patrols values of Integrity, Volunteer 
Service, Excellence, and Respect, rightfully earning this recognition 
which is a testament to his character and contributions to our 
community. I am honored to join his family, friends, and the greater 
New Jersey community in thanking him for his service to our Nation, his 
dedication to our state, and his selfless work to instill the values of 
patriotism and service in the next generation of New Jersey--and 
Americas--leaders.
I rise today to recognize Mrs. Heather 
Bowers of Frisco, Texas, and present her with the Congressional Patriot 
Award. Heather has faithfully dedicated herself to serving our 
community.
  Heather was born in Waco, Texas in 1977 and moved to Carrollton in 
1980 where she resided until she married her husband, Jason. She 
graduated from the University of North Texas in 2002 with a Bachelor of 
Applied Arts and Sciences degree and then moved to Frisco in 2005 where 
she raised her two children, Macy and Caleb. Heather has been President 
of Lone Star Benefits since 2000, buying the agency 4 years ago and 
building a thriving employee benefits agency with her husband.
  Since her move to Frisco, she has been actively involved with 
numerous community and political organizations in North Texas. 
Heathers strength is not only due to her love of lifting weights, but 
also evidenced by her service to the city through roles on the boards 
of Frisco Community Development Corporation, Frisco Chamber of Commerce 
and Frisco Family Services. She is invested in our youth and schools as 
a District Improvement Committee and Mindbender Academy Committee 
member. Heathers philanthropic passion is notable, as her family and 
business support organizations such as National Breast Cancer 
Foundation, Community Council of Greater Dallas and Los Barrios Unidos 
Community Clinic.
  I am proud to recognize Heather today for her outstanding efforts to 
support those in need and uplift those she works with. Im confident 
she will continue to make a positive impact in our community for many 
years to come.
  It is an honor to bestow Heather with the Patriot Award for her 
exceptional service to the people of North Texas.
I rise today to recognize Mrs. JoAnne Soules 
of Pittsfield, Massachusetts, and present her with the Congressional 
Patriot Award. JoAnne has dedicated herself to faithfully serving and 
uplifting her community.
  JoAnne was born in Pittsfield and attended Pittsfield High School. In 
1969, she graduated from Elms College with a bachelors degree in 
history. JoAnne also obtained her masters degree in educational 
administration and leadership from Massachusetts College of Liberal 
Arts. She later taught social studies at South Junior High, now known 
as Herberg Middle School. In 1994, JoAnne transferred to Pittsfield 
High, where she taught history before being appointed to serve as the 
Dean of Students and Vice Principal. After retiring in 2006,

JoAnne was asked to serve as interim principal for the 2009-2010 school 
year, which she happily accepted. Throughout her career, she dedicated 
herself to serving her students and staff, and this did not go 
unnoticed. JoAnne has run into former students many years later who 
fondly remember her class and the positive impact she made on them as 
an educator.
  In addition to her professional career, JoAnne has given back to her 
community in many ways. She volunteered at local soup kitchens and 
provided patient outreach at Berkshire Medical Center through her 
church to help those in need. She is married to her husband Harry, and 
together, they raised two wonderful children and have many more 
grandchildren. In her free time, she enjoys spending time with them and 
rescuing senior dogs so that they can spend the rest of their years in 
a warm and loving home. Im proud to recognize JoAnne today a lifetime 
of public service and contributions to our community. She has inspired 
countless students to be successful and live fulfilling lives.
  It is an honor to bestow JoAnne with the Patriot Award for her 
exceptional service to the people of Pittsfield.
I rise today to recognize Coach Michael 
Murgo of Pittsfield, Massachusetts, and present him with the 
Congressional Patriot Award. Coach Murgo has dedicated himself to 
faithfully serving and uplifting his community.
  A native of Bristol, Rhode Island, Coach Murgo attended Colt Memorial 
High School and Brewster Academy. During this time, he discovered his 
passion for sports, and this inspired him to study physical education. 
In 1969, Coach Murgo graduated from the University of Rhode Island, 
where he was recognized for his athletic abilities and distinction in 
football. As such, he was selected to play professional football for 
the Providence Steamrollers. Coach Murgo began working for the 
Pittsfield Public School System in 1972 as a physical education 
teacher, a role he held for over 35 years. He also served as the 
football coach for Pittsfield High School for 17 years and led his 
students to success through physical fitness, teamwork, and discipline.
  On top of his professional career, Coach Murgo worked diligently to 
support his four children so that they had the opportunity to pursue 
their interests. He is married to his wife, Ellen, and they will 
celebrate 52 years of wonderful marriage this year. I am pleased to 
recognize Coach Murgo for a lifetime of service as a teacher, coach, 
and mentor for our youth. His contributions to our community have been 
nothing short of outstanding, and I wish him continued success for many 
years to come.
  It is an honor to bestow Coach Murgo with the Patriot Award for his 
exceptional service to the people of Pittsfield.
Title IV of Senate Resolution 4, agreed to by the Senate of February 
4, 1977, calls for establishment of a system for a computerized 
schedule of all meetings and hearings of Senate committees, 
subcommittees, joint committees, and committees of conference. This 
title requires all such committees to notify the Office of the Senate 
Daily Digest--designated by the Rules Committee--of the time, place and 
purpose of the meetings, when scheduled and any cancellations or 
changes in the meetings as they occur.
  As an additional procedure along with the computerization of this 
information, the Office of the Senate Daily Digest will prepare this 
information for printing in the Extensions of Remarks section of the 
Congressional Record on Monday and Wednesday of each week.
  Meetings scheduled for Thursday, July 11, 2024 may be found in the 
Daily Digest of todays Record.

     10 a.m.
       Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions
         To hold hearings to examine Novo Nordisks high prices 
           for Ozempic and Wegovy for patients with diabetes and 
           obesity.
                                                            SD-562
as we end the 2024 session of the 
Supreme Court and prepare for students to return to school, I wish to 
reaffirm the need for race-conscious decisions in higher education to 
ensure that students of color receive fair consideration in admissions.
  Affirmative action is an important equity tool to counteract the 
effects of discrimination and structural barriers to education facing 
students of color, a tool that emerged from the Civil Rights Movement 
in the 1960s. President John F. Kennedy first established affirmative 
action to promote racial equality and prevent unfair labor practices 
through an executive order in 1961 that created the Presidents 
Committee on Equal Employment Opportunity. The landmark Civil Rights 
Act of 1964 went further to prohibit discrimination and promote equal 
opportunity based on race, color, religion, sex, and national origin. 
Subsequent executive orders, laws, and holdings by the Supreme Court 
supported race- and gender-conscious actions to address discrimination 
and enforce the Civil Rights Act of 1964.
  The consideration of race in college admissions promotes equal 
treatment without regard to race, color, religion, or national origin. 
The resulting campus diversity is a crucial element of quality higher 
education. Diversity curates higher learning opportunities and fosters 
a sense of belonging for traditionally-marginalized communities. 
Research shows that a strong sense of belonging has many positive 
outcomes for students, including improved persistence, retention, 
grades, and health. Diversity in higher education expands perspectives, 
promotes innovation, and prepares students to interact with our diverse 
citizenry.
  One year ago, the Supreme Court gutted 50 years of race-conscious 
admissions in higher education with its decision in Students for Fair 
Admissions Inc. v. President and the Fellows of Harvard. In a 6-3 
decision, the extremist-dominated court ruled that affirmative action 
violated equal protection under the 14th Amendment. The 14th Amendment 
manifested new freedom and rights at the federal level by establishing 
``equal protection under the laws for all American citizens 
regardless of race. Shockingly and offensively, the conservative-
dominated court manipulated an amendment intended to cultivate racial 
equality to stifle programs that correct systemic racial 
discrimination. I firmly agree with Justices Jackson and Sotomayor who 
opposed the ruling. Justice Sotomayor warned that ``. . . racial 
inequality will persist in educational institutions so long as it is 
ignored. Justice Jackson noted the contradictory nature of the 
absence of race in admissions decisions but not in military academies, 
prioritizing racial inclusion for military benefit rather than 
educational enrichment.
  The 7th District of Illinois, Chicago, and Illinois are home to 
millions of families whose children deserve the same access to higher 
education opportunities that privileged individuals enjoy. Extremists 
attacks on race-conscious admissions jeopardizes the future educational 
opportunities of Black and Brown children. A colorblind approach to the 
college admissions process does not acknowledge the entrenched racial 
struggles that minorities face in America. When institutions fail to 
acknowledge race, they fail to recognize the barriers to education 
associated with race that can perpetuate racial inequality in higher 
education. The Supreme Courts promotion of a colorblind society serves 
to protect the wealthy and well-connected.
  I vow to fight for equal opportunity and justice. We must protect the 
tools that are key to securing our civil rights--like race-conscious 
admissions, free and fair elections, and voter protections--to ensure 
that our nations progress in civil rights does not reverse. 
Advancement toward racial equality cannot be made without consideration 
of race.
to the immediate and extended 
family, staff, friends, supporters, constituents, colleagues, and well-
wishers of my dear friend, colleague, comrade, political ally, and our 
senior representative on the Cook County Board, I rise to honor Dr. 
Dennis Deer.
  I greet you in the name of our Lord and Savior Jesus, the Christ and 
I am sure that he has already said to Dennis, welcome home my good and 
faithful servant. I have known the Deer Family for more than fifty 
years when I met and worked with his parents; father Herman, Mother 
Shirley and their neighbors who founded the Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. 
Health Center in North Lawndale on West Greenshaw Street, they lived on 
Greenshaw Street, it was one of the first of ten centers of its kind in 
the United States, now there are fourteen hundred and they are 
servicing more than 30 million low and moderate income individuals. Of 
course, that portion of Greenshaw Street is now Honorary Shirley Deer 
Way. I lived on West Greenshaw Street. Dennis grew up around community 
activism and politics. He took to it like a duck takes to water, 
attended George W. Collins High School where my wife taught, my friends 
were principals, teachers and administrators. He went off to college, 
returned home, earned additional college degrees, married his high 
school sweetheart, wonderful wife Barbara, settled in the community, 
they have three children and he became a leader, worked with President 
Bobbie Steele, Commissioner Bob Steele, the Turner Family, the Scott 
Family, Lawndale Christian and the Faith Community to help bring the 
North Lawndale Community back to a state of optimistic redevelopment 
and it is on a roll.

  Dr. Deers service has been simply outstanding, he was an effective 
legislator, helped promote and pass Second Chance, helped nationalize 
the idea that gun violence is a Public Health Crisis, he was an 
outstanding community leader, he was the most loyal, most trustworthy 
and most likeminded political ally I have ever had, he was my friend 
and a representative of the people. He was also an outstanding 
businessman before becoming a County Commissioner, I remember when we 
took a business delegation to the Arab Emirates and Dennis was meeting 
with Warren Buffett and other top businesspersons in our country. Yes, 
our friend and brother from West Grenshaw Street has moved on but he 
has left an indelible mark on the North Lawndale Community and on 
Government in Cook County that can and will never be erased or 
forgotten. Yes, Brother Dennis, he has been the best, he has done the 
best.
  Now, yes, we will keep working to keep the candles lit and the fires 
burning. May he be at peace.