I rise today to commemorate the life and 
accomplishments of Mrs. Ann Dougherty Kraus--a pillar of our Dallas 
community.
She graduated second in her class from Western Kentucky 
University. She subsequently moved to Japan in 1952 to care for 
American soldiers injured in the Korean War. She later married William 
Kraus in France in 1956.
  A Dallas resident from 1959 until 2024, Mrs. Kraus was a giant in our 
community. She raised her four children here, along with her community 
service as a member of the Dallas County Medical Alliance, Medical 
Center Board, and President of the Parents Club at the St. Marks 
School of Texas. She was also a member of St. Thomas Aquinas Parish in 
Dallas, Texas.
  My heart goes out to all who knew and loved Ann, especially her 
sister, Margie Joy, her children, Greg, Peter, Sharon, and Stephen, her 
six grandchildren and two great-grandchildren. May her memory be a 
source of comfort and strength.
I rise to pay tribute to Hayden Marie 
Marchants graduation from The Hockaday School in Dallas, Texas. Hayden 
entered The Hockaday School as a pre-K student and attended the school 
for her entire academic career. Her graduation, years in the making, as 
she highly distinguished herself both inside and outside of the 
classroom and earned the respect of her peers and teachers.
  Among her many accomplishments at Hockaday was to serve as the editor 
of the school yearbook Cornerstones. The Hockaday yearbook is an 
exceptional annual challenge, trying to capture the year for the over 
1,000 students coming not just from the Dallas/Ft. Worth metroplex, but 
from across Texas and the globe. This was in addition to her many 
athletic talents, being a member of the high school crew, soccer, and 
track &amp; field teams.
  Her extracurricular experiences were not limited to journalism and 
sports, but also included a significant focus on religious life and 
values. Hayden frequently led Bible study at Hockaday and served as an 
active member of North Dallas Young Life. She is also a member of First 
Baptist Church and is a major volunteer at the Fields Youth Group. Each 
Sunday morning, she manages the sound and lights for the youth service, 
mainly out of view, but her service is essential. She has demonstrated 
servant leadership at both ends of the spectrum, being out in front and 
behind the scenes. This balanced leadership approach will serve her 
well in the future and will benefit many as she continues to grow.
  Hayden is the daughter of proud parents Matthew and Lindsay Marchant 
of Dallas and the sister of Kendall who graduated from Hockaday two 
years ago. Her supportive grandparents, Rodney and Sherry Hill of 
Frisco, and Kenny and Donna Marchant of Coppell, join in celebrating 
her graduation.
  The Hockaday School prides itself on their four cornerstones of 
character, courtesy, scholarship, and athletics. For fourteen years, 
Hayden has lived up to and excelled at these school values, and they 
will guide her well as she starts college.
  Hayden Marchant will attend Baylor University in Waco, Texas in the 
fall of 2024. Hayden was admitted to the Hankamer Scholars and Business 
Fellows programs, as well as the Honors College. Hayden has chosen to 
be a Business Fellow which is a highly selective program for high-
ability students. Through the Business Fellows program, Hayden will be 
a student in both entrepreneurship and religion. She has already taken 
the entrepreneurship mantra very seriously at a young age, as she is 
the creator and head designer of the Rocking M Beads jewelry business.
  I ask all of my colleagues to join me in honoring Hayden Marchant on 
her high school graduation and all of her classmates on this important 
milestone. Our best wishes for her continued success as she starts her 
studies at Baylor University this fall, sicem Bears.
Jessica received her B.S. in psychology and 
business administration from the University of Florida. She met her 
husband, Hunter, at UF. She continued her studies and received her 
Juris Doctorate from Barry University School of Law.
  She believed that education had the power to transform lives and 
dedicated her early professional career to making education accessible. 
As the chief operating officer for NeoCity Links, Jessica helps develop 
strategic initiatives to promote economic growth. She coordinates 
business development efforts by working with public, private, and 
nonprofit sectors. She has proven expertise in a wide range of areas 
and successfully developed new international partnerships for Osceola 
County.
  Jessica focuses her time outside of work on empowering women leaders 
through mentorship. She serves as the president of the PCUSA National 
Korean Presbyterian Women and actively strives to create opportunities 
for engagement and enablement for women to reach the highest level of 
leadership and potential.
  Jessica resides in Windermere, Florida, with her husband and loves 
snuggling with her five children, reading, cooking, and kickboxing.
I rise today to congratulate 
Superintendent Pam Conklin upon her retirement as Superintendent of the 
Travis Unified School District after more than 25 years of service in 
education. Ms. Conklins steadfast dedication to enhancing the quality 
of education in Solano County and advocating for her students has left 
a lasting impact on the Solano County community.
a teacher with the Novato 
Unified School District. Throughout her twenty-year tenure with the 
District, Ms. Conklin demonstrated a genuine commitment to fostering an 
environment of community and respect in her classrooms. She ultimately 
became the Assistant Superintendent for Human Resources for the 
District, where she spearheaded efforts to ensure all students, 
regardless of their background, can reach their full potential.
  In 2015, her passion for education led her to serve as the Oakley 
Union Elementary School District Superintendent. During her tenure, her 
collaboration with the Contra Costa County community and her critical 
leadership helped ensure the continued success of the Oakley Union 
School District.
  Upon her departure from the Oakley Union School District, Ms. Conklin 
began working at the Travis Unified School District as the Human 
Resources Administrator and in 2017, she began serving as 
Superintendent. Her critical efforts to advocate for the students, 
teachers, and families of Solano County and Travis Air Force Base were 
indispensable to our community.
  As Superintendent, Ms. Conklin played a pivotal role in supporting 
Travis Air Force Base and helping nine schools in the District earn the 
designation of ``Purple Star Schools, schools that are committed to 
and equipped to meet the unique needs of military-affiliated students 
and their families.
  While her leadership as Superintendent will surely be missed, Ms. 
Conklins decades of service to the students of Northern California and 
Travis Unified School District have left an indelible legacy. I would 
like to extend my sincere gratitude to Ms. Conklin and wish her the 
best in her future endeavors.
I rise today to honor the life and legacy 
of a great environmental champion from southeastern Connecticut whom we 
lost recently, Mr. E. Zell Steever, V. A fierce advocate for climate 
resilience and sustainability policy, Zell spent his career in ecology 
and biology, serving as Director of Water and Related Resources at the 
Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection, along with other 
roles in water resources protection and management at agencies such as 
the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the U.S. Department of 
Interior, the U.S. Bureau of Reclamation, and U.S. Army Corps of 
Engineers. His decade-spanning support for environmental conservation 
and dedication to robust civic participation has been instrumental in 
the great strides our State has taken to realize a sustainable, 
climate-resilient future.
  Zell began life with his family in Noank, Connecticut, where he 
settled after graduating from the University of Connecticut. He 
attended graduate school at Connecticut College, studying the local 
coastal salt march ecosystem and building a repository of evidence of 
the importance of healthy wetlands to fisheries, one of southeastern 
Connecticuts mainstay professions. In his free time, Zell was 
frequently seen sailing up and down the Long Island Sound, designing 
and renovating homes, and building Aleutian kayaks.
  Zells impact has reached far beyond the limits of Eastern 
Connecticut, as he held multiple national level positions. He advised 
President Nixon as a staff member of the Presidents Council on 
Environmental Equality. In

1993 he was selected for the 1992 delegation to the UN Earth Summit 
where he led negotiations on five chapters of Agenda 21 on behalf of 
the United States. He continued his high-stakes environmental work and 
advocacy until his retirement in 2004. Luckily for Eastern Connecticut, 
Zells retirement was only in name. He continued his tireless work in 
Groton town committees including the Town Councils Climate Change and 
Sustainable Community Task Force, the Energy Efficiency and 
Conservation Committee, and the Utility Drinking Water Quality 
Management Plan.
  Zell was tirelessly active in municipal efforts to prepare for 
climate change, serving the community with groups such as the Groton 
Energy Efficiency and Conservation Commission and the advisory board 
for the Groton Utility Drinking Water Quality Management. One of Zells 
most ambitious local efforts focused on the expansion of the areas 
commuter rail service, Shoreline East. His vision included extending 
the existing rail line from New London to Westerly, Rhode Island, 
making a route from New London to Norwich, and creating new stations in 
Groton and Stonington. He worked tirelessly to bring together 
stakeholders from across the region, creating a coalition of advocates 
with environmentalism and equity at the heart of its mission. Zell was 
at the forefront of this burgeoning expansion effort, leveraging his 
decades of experience in government and conservation to successfully 
push for legislation that called for an Eastern Connecticut Rail and 
Transit Feasibility Study, which was finalized and published in later 
2023. This study will be instrumental in the further development of 
widely available and accessible rail in southeastern Connecticut, for 
which we have Zell to thank.
  I ask my colleagues in the U.S. House of Representatives to join me 
in honoring Zell Steevers service and spirit. His loss is felt deeply 
across the state and Nation. He is survived by his wife, Elizabeth, two 
sons, John and Scott, two stepsons, Jonathan and Gabriel, six 
grandchildren, and his brother Sanford. His resolute mission to protect 
the planet we call home and his devoted service to his communities will 
serve as a lasting legacy in the hearts and minds of Connecticuts 
future environmentalists and conservationists as they continue the work 
he dedicated his life to.
yesterday I mistakenly voted Yea on 
Roll Call No. 202, passage of H. Res. 1210, the Resolution ``Condemning 
the Biden border crisis and the tremendous burdens law enforcement 
officers face as a result.
  I intended to vote Nay, as Ive consistently done on similar 
politically-charged, non-binding resolutions that play politics instead 
of work to achieve a bipartisan solution to the border. I regret the 
error.
I rise today to recognize Hands of the 
Carpenter from Golden, Colorado on receiving the 2024 Golden Rotary 
Clubs Ethics in Business Award.
  For over two decades, Hands of the Carpenter has provided crucial 
support to single mothers through free and low-cost automobile repairs 
and maintenance. Hands of the Carpenter has grown significantly since 
its inception, going from assisting a handful of women each year to 
helping over 600 last year alone. For many single mothers, a reliable 
vehicle can make a world of difference. Hands of the Carpenter helps 
bring stability to often uncertain circumstances.
  On behalf of the people of Colorados Seventh Congressional District, 
it is my honor to recognize the Hands of the Carpenter organization for 
all they do for our community.
I rise today to recognize Jazzy Modecker 
for earning the Arvada Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth Award.
  Jazzy has overcome many challenges along her journey to success, 
demonstrating perseverance at every step. Students who strive to make 
the most of their education, like Jazzy, develop crucial skills and a 
work ethic that will guide them for the rest of their lives. This award 
is a testament to Jazzys hard work, determination, and perseverance at 
Oberon Middle School and is clearly just the beginning of a bright and 
promising future.
  It is my honor to congratulate Jazzy Modecker on achieving the Arvada 
Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth Award.
I rise today to recognize and honor the 
service of one of my constituents, Lt. Matthew Hare, of the Inverness 
Fire Department. For the past three years, the Inverness Fire 
Department has been going through a rebuilding phase. Lt. Hare has been 
a vital part of this process and has been the go-to guy for any project 
that needs to be completed. He is constantly working to improve his 
skills and further his education. His excellent work ethic has allowed 
him to become one of the department leaders and he is a role model to 
his peers. Lt. Hare operates in a manner that brings great credit to 
himself, his family, the City, and the citizens he serves.
  These are just a few examples of the hard work, dedication, eagerness 
to help, and servant leadership that Lt. Hare exhibits every day when 
he goes to work. He is a shining example of what it means to be an 
Inverness First Responder. His work ethic should be a benchmark for 
which other first responders should strive to attain. It is evident 
that Lt. Hare has made a profoundly positive impact on our community 
and is qualified to be recognized as a First Responder of the Year for 
Floridas 12th Congressional District.
I rise today to recognize and honor the 
service of one of my constituents, Communications Officer Michael 
Whitaker, of the Citrus County Sheriffs Office. On Friday, Dec. 8, 
2023, Officer Whitaker was working in the Communication Section as an 
Intake Operator when a constituent called 911 to advise that his 3-
month-old daughter, Harmonie, was choking and could not breath. After 
de-escalating the parent and helping him become calm enough to follow 
instructions, Officer Whitaker proceeded to provide lifesaving 
instructions on how to clear the babys airway. The father followed all 
the instructions and was able to clear her airway. With Harmonie able 
to breathe fresh oxygen again, EMS arrived on scene and transported her 
to a nearby hospital for observation. Thanks to Officer Whitakers 
swift actions, professionalism, and composure, Baby Harmonie is doing 
great today.
  This is just one example of the hard work, dedication, eagerness to 
help, and servant leadership that Communications Officer Whitaker 
exhibits every day when he goes to work. Officer Whitaker is a shining 
example of what it means to be a Citrus County First Responder. His 
work ethic should be a benchmark for which other first responders 
should strive to attain. It is evident that Officer Whitaker has made a 
profoundly positive impact on our community and is qualified to be 
recognized as a First Responder of the Year for Floridas 12th 
Congressional District.
I rise today to recognize Olivia Macias 
for earning the Arvada Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth Award.
  Olivia has overcome many challenges along her journey to success, 
demonstrating perseverance at every step. Students who strive to make 
the most of their education, like Olivia, develop crucial skills and a 
work ethic that will guide them for the rest of their lives. This award 
is a testament to Olivias hard work, determination, and perseverance 
at Oberon Middle School and is clearly just the beginning of a bright 
and promising future.
  It is my honor to congratulate Olivia Macias on achieving the Arvada 
Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth Award.