I rise today to commemorate a 
significant milestone in the field of education, health care and 
community enrichment--the 50th anniversary of the University of South 
Florida (USF) Health Morsani College of Medicine. For half a century, 
this respected institution has been a beacon of innovation, excellence 
and service, shaping the future of medicine and health care in our 
community and beyond.
  Founded in 1971, the USF Morsani College of Medicine has consistently 
demonstrated a steadfast commitment to educate the next generation of 
physicians, advance medical knowledge through cutting-edge research, 
and provide compassionate, patient-centered care to individuals and 
communities in need. As we mark the 50th anniversary of the graduating 
charter class in 2024, we reflect on the schools remarkable journey. 
Over the past five decades, it has not only met but exceeded its 
ambitious objectives, leaving an enduring impact on medical education 
and practice. From pioneering research to improving patient care, the 
Morsani College of Medicine has made its mark in the Tampa Bay 
community, shaping the landscape of health care for generations to 
come.
  The contributions made by the Morsani College of Medicine to the 
field of medicine and health care are far reaching. Through its 
comprehensive academic programs, cutting-edge research facilities and 
collaborations with valued health care institutions like Tampa General 
Hospital, H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center, and local VA hospitals, the 
College has produced generations of highly skilled and compassionate 
medical professionals who made invaluable contributions to their 
respective fields. Whether in primary care, specialty medicine, or 
research, graduates of the College of Medicine have consistently 
exemplified the highest standards of professionalism, integrity, and 
excellence.
  The Morsani College of Medicine plays a pivotal role in addressing 
the current doctor shortage crisis we are facing in Florida. After a 
population boom during the pandemic, the Tampa Bay area has a dire need 
for doctors. USF is meeting the moment by training high-caliber 
physicians, many of whom want to stay and practice in the state. Over 
the five decades since its inaugural graduating class, the USF Health 
Morsani College of Medicine has bestowed the prestigious medical degree 
upon nearly 5,100 graduates.
  The impact of the Morsani College of Medicine extends far beyond the 
boundaries of its campus. Through its commitment to community 
engagement and service, the College has played a pivotal role in 
addressing the health care needs of my neighbors in Tampa Bay.
  From providing essential health care services to vulnerable 
communities to spearheading groundbreaking research initiatives aimed 
at combating health disparities, the College of Medicine has remained 
committed in its dedication to improving the health and well-being of 
all members of our community, regardless of their background or 
socioeconomic status.
  As a proud co-founder and co-chair of the Academic Medicine Caucus, I 
am firmly dedicated to promoting and recognizing the important role 
that medical schools, teaching hospitals and faculty physicians play to 
improve the health of people everywhere. As we celebrate the 50th 
anniversary of the Morsani College of Medicine, let us not only reflect 
on its great past but also look ahead to a future filled with infinite 
potential and possibility. I will continue to support and nurture the 
Morsani College of Medicine as it embarks on its next chapter of 
excellence, innovation and service to our Tampa Bay neighbors, and the 
residents of Florida and the United States.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in extending heartfelt 
congratulations to the University of South Florida Health Morsani 
School of Medicine on this momentous occasion. May the next 50 years be 
marked by even greater achievements, medical advancements, and the 
improvement of the lives of the residents of Florida and the United 
States.
I rise today to celebrate the 
15th Anniversary of P.A.S.O.--West Suburban Action Project (Proyecto de 
Accion de los Suburbios del Oeste), a community-based social justice 
organization in Chicago whose mission is to build stronger communities 
where residents can live dignified lives regardless of race, ethnicity, 
socioeconomic or immigration status.
  Since its founding in 2009, P.A.S.O. has become one of the leading 
immigrant rights organizations through grassroots organizing and 
coalition building working in collaboration with partners to create 
systemic, social change that leads to more equitable and just 
communities for people of all backgrounds.
  Over the past fifteen years, P.A.S.O. has been a pillar of our 
community and a beacon of hope for so many. From supporting immigrants 
and refugees training them to defend their rights, to providing health 
education to seniors and parents, to championing workers rights, and 
providing free educational opportunities in Spanish, P.A.S.O. supports 
communities in the quest for change.
  I am honored to commemorate P.A.S.O. on their 15th Anniversary. 
Congratulations (eFelicidades!).
I rise today to honor our Texas-24 
Hometown Hero, Maddox Olatunde. As quarterback for L.D. Bell High 
School in Hurst, Maddox Olatunde helped lead the Blue Raiders to 
victory over their longtime rival, Euless Trinity, for the first time 
in 25 years. After completing 18 of 21 passes for 150 yards plus 135 
rushing yards and a touchdown, Maddox was selected as the Dallas 
Morning News ``Inside High School Sports Player of the Week.

  Beyond the football field, Maddox is the team captain of the Varsity 
Mens Soccer Team and the principal cellist of the L.D, Bell 
Philharmonic Orchestra. He recently received the 2024 HEB ISD Education 
Foundation Award of Excellence, which is given to 33 outstanding high 
school seniors who have worked hard, overcome adversity, found their 
passion, blossomed, and excelled above their cohorts.
  I want to congratulate Maddox on his outstanding achievements, both 
on the field and off.
I rise to honor our Texas-24 Hometown 
Hero, Mirchelle Louis. Mirchelle Louis has spent the past 18 years 
smoothing the cancer journey for everyone whos walked through the 
doors of Cancer Support Community North Texas. As a clinical social 
worker, she joined the organization in 2006 providing comprehensive 
support to cancer patients free of charge. During her time working at 
the organization, she briefly served as Executive Director of Susan G. 
Komen for the Cure North Texas.
  With 3 clubhouses located in Dallas, Tarrant, and Collin counties, 
Cancer Support

Community North Texas offers patients a sense of hope through support 
groups, counseling services, resources, and activities free of charge. 
In 2016, Mirchelle took on the role of CEO for the organization 
providing thoughtful, structured psychological and emotional support 
for patients. Five years later, she became a grateful client of the 
organization shes spearheaded for almost two decades after receiving a 
breast cancer diagnosis. Even while undergoing four rounds of one type 
of chemotherapy, 15 weekly treatments of another, and daily radiation 
for over six weeks, Mirchelle chose to focus on the positives and used 
what she was dealing with on a personal level to better connect with 
clients.
  Id like to thank Mirchelle for the incredible work shes done to 
support and inspire North Texas cancer patients--even through her own 
cancer journey.
I rise to recognize the Federal Medical 
Center, located in Lexington, Kentucky. David Paul serves as Warden and 
Keith Blanke is Associate Warden. They lead a large staff of dedicated 
individuals.
  In 1935, the United States Narcotic Farm facility opened in the 
countryside outside of Lexington. Known as Narco, this facilitys 
mission was to treat people struggling with addiction, using new and 
often experimental treatments. It was a combination prison and hospital 
with a research facility. Inmates worked on the farm that was located 
on the grounds. They also interacted with each other through playing 
music, taking painting classes, and participating in social activities. 
When it first opened, only men who were arrested for drug-related 
offenses were housed there; women were admitted in 1941.
  In 1967, the farm portion of the operation closed, and the name of 
the facility was changed to the National Institute of Mental Health, 
Clinical Research Center. In 1974, the facility became a Federal prison 
and was named The Federal Medical Center, Lexington. Today, The Federal 
Medical Center, Lexington celebrates 50 years of service. The Center, 
operated by the Federal Bureau of Prisons, serves around 1500 inmates, 
who each require medical health care.
  The Federal Medical Center serves an important role in our Nations 
Department of Justice. I would like to offer my thanks and appreciation 
to each person employed by the Federal Medical Center.
I rise today to honor the life and legacy of 
(Don) Sun, who passed away on March 13, 2024, in San 
Jose, California, with his family by his side. Don was a distinguished 
citizen who dedicated his life to advocacy, including advocating on 
behalf of Asian Americans, and served a prominent role in American 
politics.
10, 1959, in Beijing, China. He obtained a 
bachelors degree from Renmin University of China in Beijing in 1982. 
After graduation, Mr. Sun worked on the Economic Reform and Opening-up 
policies for six years, focusing on agrarian reform, privatization of 
land, and grassroots elections in rural China. This work ignited his 
passion to tirelessly serve the people and galvanized his commitment to 
the betterment of society. He also earned a masters degree in 
economics from the University of Pennsylvania in 1990 and worked as a 
research fellow at the Hoover Institute at Stanford from 1990 to 1993, 
specializing in the research of political and land reform in Taiwan.
2009 and as 
a Cupertino Planning Commissioner from 2011-2019. He was also actively 
involved in the Cupertino Rotary Club for nearly two decades. Mr. Sun 
was vocal about the treatment of Asian Americans, leading advocacy 
efforts towards securing a formal apology from the U.S. House of 
Representatives for the Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882. Mr. Sun will be 
forever remembered for his contributions to the Asian American 
community.
May his proud legacy continue to 
live on through all who had the honor of knowing him.
I rise today to honor the life and 
career of National Park Service Ranger Tom Lorig, who tragically passed 
away at the age of 78 on Friday, June 7, 2024, while on the Job in 
Bryce Canyon, Utah.
  Ranger Lorig worked and volunteered as a National Park Service Ranger 
for fifty-six years. He became involved with the park service in 1968, 
working at the Carlsbad Caverns National Park in New Mexico for five 
years. During his career, he served at fourteen national park sites, 
including Badlands, Bryce Canyon, Yosemite, Zion, and the Dinosaur 
National Monument, for which he had a particular affection. He also 
served for over ten years as a permanent, seasonal, and volunteer park 
ranger across many of these park sites.
  Beyond his service to our national parks, Ranger Lorig was also a 
registered nurse for forty years in the Seattle, Washington area, 
demonstrating his commitment to helping people and supporting those who 
needed it.
  I want to extend my deepest sympathies to Ranger Lorigs family, 
friends, and the Bryce Canyon National Park community. His loss will be 
felt by those who knew him and the many he assisted during his 
impactful career as both a nurse and a Park Ranger.
  It is public servants like Ranger Lorig who truly make our country 
great.
today, I introduce a bill that would make a 
small but respectful change to federal law by adding the Mayor of the 
District of Columbia to the list of named principals for whom the 
President shall order the U.S. flag be flown at half-staff. Current law 
states that the President shall make this order ``upon the death of 
principal figures of the United States Government and the Governor of a 
State, territory, or possession, as a mark of respect to their 
memory. Surely the D.C. Mayor should qualify as such a principal. My 
bill would add the D.C. Mayor, who has the same responsibilities as 
state and territory governors, to the current list of officials. This 
bill is part of a series of bills to ensure equal treatment for the 
nearly 700,000 residents of the District of Columbia. In the 116th 
Congress, the House Committee on the Judiciary passed this bill.
  Congress has already acknowledged that D.C. is entitled to a place 
among the states for certain honors. For example, legislation we got 
enacted gave D.C. a coin after D.C. was omitted from legislation 
creating coins for the states and required the armed services to 
display the D.C. flag whenever the flags of the states are displayed. 
We got D.C.s Frederick Douglass and Pierre LEnfant statues placed in 
the Capitol, alongside the two statues from each state. We also 
successfully worked with the U.S. Postal Service to create a D.C. 
stamp, like the stamps for the states, and successfully worked with the 
National Park Service to add the D.C. flag alongside the state flags 
near Union Station.
  I urge my colleagues to support this bill.
I was not present during votes on Tuesday, 
June 4th or Wednesday, June 5th.
  Had I been present, I would have voted: NAY on Roll Call No. 242, and 
NAY on Roll Call No. 247.
I rise today to recognize Officer Shayne 
Kotaras 22 years of service with the North Richland Hills Police 
Department. Officer Kotara began his career in the Patrol Division, 
where he soon became an invaluable asset to the Department because of 
his committed work ethic and love for serving his community.
  Officer Kotara has served the police department in several capacities 
over the years. In 2006, Officer Kotara transferred to the Criminal 
Investigations Division where he was assigned to the DEAs Fort Worth 
Multi-Agency Task Force and later to the DEAs Drug Diversion Task 
Force. In 2017, Officer Kotara was transferred back to the Uniformed 
Services Division, and from there he was transferred to the Community 
Resources Division in 2019. For the last five years, he has served as a 
school resource officer in the North Richland Hills district. Officer 
Kotara has shown exceptional dedication and has made a positive impact 
on his community.
  Throughout his distinguished career, Officer Kotara has received 
numerous awards and commendations, reflecting his exemplary service and 
dedication. He currently holds a Master Peace Officer License and was 
awarded one Lifesaving Award. In addition, hes received two 
Meritorious Service Awards and seven Certificates of Recognition due to 
his outstanding service in the City of North Richland Hills.
  Id like to thank Officer Kotara for his outstanding service to our 
community during his career with the North Richland Hills Police 
Department.
I rise today to recognize Peterson Health in 
their seventy-fifth year of serving the Texas Hill Country. The 
community is forever grateful to Hal and Charlie Peterson, two brothers 
who envisioned a full-service hospital in Kerrville, Texas. The 
Petersons efforts began in 1944 by establishing the Hal and Charlie 
Peterson Foundation with an initial donation of one hundred dollars. 
Three years later, the Foundation board green-lit construction of a 
hospital for ``the benefit of the people of the Hill Country in 
general. The brothers started building on their land at Sidney Baker 
and Water Streets in Kerrville. Named for their father, the Sid 
Peterson Memorial Hospital opened its doors on July 3, 1949. I include 
in the Record an excerpt from the Petersons opening ceremony speech 
that day:

       ``And so here it is; its yours to use. If it will ease a 
     little the sufferings of the sick and injured; if it will 
     help a little to mend their broken bodies; if it will provide 
     a place where the next generation--and the next--can enter 
     this world with the best of care and attention, and if it can 
     do these things at a minimum of expense to those who must be 
     patients, then our purpose in building it and giving it to 
     the Hill Country community has been well-served.
       It was a world-class facility, the first in America to have 
     a central air conditioning system. Another groundbreaking 
     feature was the intercom system that connected each patients 
     bed to the nurses station. In 1969, the hospital underwent 
     extensive upgrades and increased bed capacity to eighty-six. 
     A six-million-dollar expansion plan was completed in 1985, 
     including a new Surgical Annex. The hospital became 
     independent from the Hal and Charlie Peterson Foundation five 
     years later. At the turn of the millennium, medical air 
     transport services were added to San Antonio and Austin.
       In 2008, the hospital changed locations to the new Peterson 
     Health campus, complete with a brand-new hospital building. 
     It was the only hospital in Texas to be named a Top 20 Rural 
     Community Hospital by the National Rural Health Association. 
     A groundbreaking ceremony was held in 2022 for the Amanda and 
     J. David Williams Surgery Center which will expand surgical 
     capacity by 25% and procedure rooms by 50%. Congratulations 
     to CEO Cory Edmondson and the entire staff on seventy-five 
     years of service to the Hill Country. I applaud Petersons 
     stated mission of ``maintaining their status as an 
     independent, private, nonprofit health system.
I rise today to commemorate the 125th 
anniversary of the Monmouth County Historical Association. This 
milestone will be celebrated by its leadership, members, and the 
greater community at its 49th Annual Garden Party on June 7, 2024. I 
would also like to join the Monmouth County Historical Association in 
honoring the members of its newly formed Advisory Council: Robert 
Broege, Hope Jones, and Ross Millhiser.
  Organized by a group of Monmouth County residents with the intention 
of preserving and celebrating the countys rich history, the Monmouth 
County Historical Association has grown immensely since 1898. In less 
than 25 years, the group had expanded to several hundred members and 
procured an extensive collection. Today, the Association boasts a 
collection of over 30,000 artifacts, a headquarters, library, archives, 
and five historic houses.
  The Association is a renowned historical organization that continues 
to fulfill its mission to discover, preserve, and promote the history, 
genealogy, and biography of Monmouth County. Through its work, the 
Association provides an anthology of our heritage for future 
generations. Its exhibitions explore various topics from the American 
Revolution to the Countys resort towns. It has received Giles R. 
Wright Award twice for its recent work to share the stories and 
experiences of the enslaved in Monmouth County. In its 125th year, the 
Monmouth County Historical Association is led by Executive Director 
Shannon Eadon and a knowledgeable staff as well as its Executive 
Committee, Board of Trustees, and its new Advisory Council.
  The Monmouth County Historical Association continues to play a vital 
role in the preservation and promotion of the Countys rich history. As 
it marks its 125th anniversary, I sincerely hope my colleagues will 
join me in recognizing the contributions and efforts of the Monmouth 
County Historical Association.
I rise today to celebrate the life of 
Tommie Frye, a resident of Ypsilanti, Michigan and veteran of the 
Vietnam War, and to mourn his passing. His dedication to his country 
and local community over a long and exceptional life is worthy of 
commendation.
  Tommie served honorably as a medic in the United States Army during 
the Vietnam War. He met his wife, Sally Frye, at church while stationed 
at Fort Sam Houston in San Antonio. After finishing his service, he 
worked at Ford until his retirement.
  Throughout his life, Tommie gave much of his time, energy, and 
resources to Parkridge Community Center in Ypsilanti. He worked 
tirelessly with the young people in his community as a beloved mentor, 
helping to keep them away from trouble and steering them towards 
successful futures. His unwavering support as a donor and fundraiser 
was also vital to Parkridge Community Centers ability to continue 
operating as a pillar of support for the young people of Ypsilanti.
  Tommies faith was a crucial part of him. He was a member of Mt. 
Olive Church of God in Christ in Ypsilanti, Michigan for his entire 
life. He was a pillar of the Mt. Olive community, serving as a deacon, 
usher, and trustee. He lived out his faith in every aspect of his life 
through his service, generosity, love, and compassion for everyone 
around him. His faith in God gave him strength in his final days as he 
went to claim his eternal reward.
  Tommie is survived and remembered by his loving wife Sally, to whom 
he was married for 52 years, his four children, and his thirteen 
grandchildren.
, I ask my colleagues to join me today in celebrating the 
life of Tommie Frye. Tommie was an incredible representation of 
answering our nations highest calling. He served his country with 
honor in Vietnam and afterward throughout his local community, bringing 
joy, enthusiasm, and love to everyone he met along the way. We mourn 
with his loved ones and thank them for sharing Tommie with us.