I rise today to recognize the 30th Annual 
Anaheim Tree Lighting Festival, which will bring our community together 
this Sunday, December 8, 2024. The festival rings in the holidays with 
a very special tree-lighting celebration on the steps of Anaheim City 
Hall in Downtown Anaheim.
  For the past 30 years, the Annual Anaheim Tree Lighting Festival has 
provided holiday fun to everyone in our community--and it is one of my 
hometowns favorite annual celebrations.
  The City of Anaheim worked together with many community partners to 
create this event, including Children Dental Fun Zone, Credit Union of 
Southern California, Home Comfort USA, Knorr, Land Care, Taqueritos, 
The Frida Cinema, Zambos, and the Orange County District Attorneys 
Office. This year, the Anaheim Tree Lighting Festival includes 
entertainment and food, a Holiday Village, the Candy Canine Costume 
Contest, a visit with Santa &amp; Mrs. Claus, a brief performance of The 
Nutcracker by the Anaheim Ballet Company, and the Tree Lighting 
Ceremony in front of City Hall.
  I ask my colleagues to join me in recognizing the Anaheim Tree 
Lighting Festival, which for 30 years has brought joy and festive 
spirits to help greet the holiday season.
CELEBRATING DR. ANGELIKA SCHROEDERS STORIED CAREER AND SERVICE TO 
                              of colorado
today I wish to honor and thank Dr. Angelika 
Schroeder for her storied career and dedication to serving communities 
across Colorado, for her commitment to improving educational 
opportunities for our students, for her advocacy on behalf of our 
schools, and for her mentorship and friendship throughout the years.
. She attended the University of 
Colorado, Boulder, where she earned a bachelors degree in mathematics, 
a masters degree in business administration, and a doctorate in 
accounting. Dr. Schroeder then shared her expertise with students as a 
tax CPA and college professor of accounting. From there, her passion 
for education led her to become involved in her daughters schools at 
the local, district, state, and national levels.
  In 1995, Governor Roy Romer appointed Dr. Schroeder to an advisory 
board of the State Board of Education. In 1999, she became a member of 
the Boulder Valley School Board, where she served as treasurer and vice 
president. In January 2009, Dr. Schroeder was appointed to the State 
Board of Education to fill a vacancy and was later elected to the board 
in November 2010. She has since been re-elected twice and will complete 
her final term in January 2025.
  Throughout her career, Dr. Schroeder has also served on the boards 
and executive committees of the Colorado Association of School Boards 
(CASB), the Alliance for Quality Teaching, and the Public Education and 
Business Coalition. She has participated in the National School Boards 
Association Federal Relations Network, where she worked with members of 
Colorados congressional delegation, including myself, to push for 
policies that strengthen our education system and make progress on 
critical issues--supporting bills like the No Child Left Behind Act and 
Individuals with Disabilities Education Act.
  In sum, Dr. Schroeder has had a tremendous impact on the people of 
Colorado, consistently upholding her commitment to enhancing our 
states education system and ensuring

that we serve our students to the best of our ability. The impacts of 
her actions will be felt for many years to come.
  So, on behalf of Colorados 2nd Congressional District, I thank and 
honor Dr Angelika Schroeder for her invaluable contributions to paving 
a better future for our state, country, and the upcoming generations.
  I Thank Angelika and wish her all the best in your future endeavors
along with my colleague Congressman Mark 
DeSaulnier, I rise to recognize Senator Steven (Steve) Glazer of 
Californias 7th Senate District for his dedication to public service 
to our shared constituency.
  Steve was born in Sacramento, California, and earned his Bachelor of 
Arts degree from San Diego State University. His roles in leadership 
started while he was a student when he served as president of the 
associated student body and chair of the California State Student 
Association.
  In 1983, Steve began his career in public service as a press 
secretary for then-Assemblyman Gray Davis. Steve played a pivotal role 
in raising awareness for missing children by championing the movement 
to put their faces and stories on milk cartons, bus stops, and 
billboards.
  In 1989, Steve founded his own public relations, media, and political 
consulting firm, Glazer &amp; Associates. Steve served as senior advisor to 
Kathleen Browns campaign for State Treasurer and Michael Woos 1994 
race for Secretary of State.
  Steve also successfully campaigned for Proposition 46, which created 
a trust fund to provide shelters for battered women, low-income senior 
citizens, and unhoused communities.
  An accomplished political strategist, Steve served on the City of 
Orinda Parks and Recreation Commission from 1997 to 1999. Steve was 
later elected to the Orinda City Council in 2004, 2008, and 2012. He 
continued his service to the City of Orinda and was elected mayor in 
2007 where he served until his election to the State Senate to 2015.
  Some of his notable accomplishments during his tenure in the Senate 
include authoring a truth-in-lending law requiring more transparency in 
the lending process for small businesses and co-authoring a law banning 
the sale of flavored tobacco in California.
  Steve has remained steadfast to his principles and in his commitment 
to improving the lives of those in his community. With the utmost 
respect for his service and with best wishes for his future endeavors, 
we extend our deepest gratitude and congratulations to Mr. Glazer as he 
enters this new chapter of his life. We hope the conclusion of this 
chapter allows him to spend more time with his wife, Melba, and his 
daughters, Ariel and Alex.
I rise today to congratulate 
ATW Health Solutions on their 10th Anniversary of operation. ATW 
provides first class healthcare management and consulting services to 
the residents of the 1st Congressional District and Chicagoland 
communities.
  Founded in 2014 by Dr. Knitasha Washington, DHA, MHA, FACHE, ATW 
Health Solutions provides unparalleled service and innovation in the 
healthcare industry. Dr. Washington has over 30 years of experience in 
the healthcare field that has allowed her to lead ATW to become one of 
the top small businesses in our community.
  In 2009, Dr. Washington tragically lost her father, Anthony T. 
Washington, Sr. to a preventable medical error. This event inspired her 
to found ATW, and to name it in his memory. His impact is still being 
felt through his daughters work to this day.
  Dr. Washington has served as a board member for the National Quality 
Forum, National Association of Health Services Executives (NAHSE), 
MedStar System Patient and Family Council for Quality and Safety, and 
the Franciscan Health Missions and HR Committee. Through her service 
she has continued to advocate for equitable health solutions and work 
with key stakeholders to achieve these goals.
  Over the last 10 years, ATW has earned national praise for 
transforming healthcare delivery systems as a small, minority owned 
business.
  As unjust disparities persist in the healthcare industry, small 
businesses like ATW continue to strive for a better future for all 
Americans, no matter their background.
  Over the next 10 years the incredible staff at ATW will continue 
their vital work to deliver healthcare systems and treatments 
throughout the industry in a more efficient and equitable manner. As 
their Congressman, I cannot wait to see what their future holds.
  The incredible research team on staff have brought previously unheard 
voices in healthcare to the forefront of the conversation so that 
healthcare outcomes continue to become more equitable. Today, we 
celebrate their 10th anniversary with them and wish them another 10 
years of similar success and achievement.
I rise today to honor the service of General 
Chris Donahue and congratulate him on his promotion to four-star 
General as he relinquishes his long and distinguished command of the 
XVIII Airborne Corps and Fort Liberty.
  A proud West Point graduate, General Donahue has dedicated his life 
to serving this country. Starting off as a Ranger, General Donahue has 
deployed over 20 times throughout his career. His deployments took him 
to active combat zones including in Iraq, Afghanistan, and Syria.
  General Donahue has served in numerous leadership positions including 
Director of Operations for Joint Special Operations Command, the 
Commandant at the Infantry School in Ft. Benning, and most recently as 
Commanding General of the XVIII Airborne Corps and Fort Liberty. During 
his time at Fort Liberty General Donahue embodied his motto of 
``leaders jump first and eat last as he always put the service 
members under his command first. General Donahue instituted the Sunset 
Liberty March, designed to honor veterans, active-duty service members 
and Gold Star Families. This incredible initiative brings together 
members of the community, veteran groups and active-duty service 
members to remember and commemorate those who have given their lives in 
defense of this country, as well as their family members. I am so proud 
to have worked with this great American and am excited to see him 
succeed throughout the rest of his honorable career.
  Because of his vast leadership experience, and clear dedication to 
his country, I can think of no one better to be promoted to four-star 
General. While Ft. Liberty is sure to miss General Donahues 
leadership, we look forward to his continued service to our great 
Nation as a four-star General.
, please join me today in congratulating General Chris 
Donahue on his promotion to four-star General and I thank him for his 
years of uniformed service to the United States.
I rise today to congratulate and give 
thanks to Charles M. Hale, Jr. for his longstanding service to his 
community as a first responder.
  It takes incredible courage to be a firefighter, and Charles M. Hale, 
Jr. of Hanover exemplifies this trait unequivocally. Mr. Hale recently 
retired from Hanover Area Fire and Rescue after 34 years of service. In 
that time, Mr. Hale has received numerous awards and citations for his 
actions in the line of duty. In 1992, Firefighter Hale was involved in 
the rescue of multiple civilians from an apartment fire. For his 
actions, Mr. Hale was awarded the Medal of Valor, the highest award in 
the country for public safety officers. In 2012, Mr Hale was awarded 
the Medal of Merit for his actions on a vehicle accident and 
entrapment.
  With more than 50 years of experience with fire and EMS service, Mr. 
Hale was a key asset to the Hanover Area Fire and Rescue. Not only was 
his experience vital, but his mentorship to all the other firefighters 
was crucial in making the Hanover Fire Department what it is today. For 
more than three decades Charles M. Hale, Jr. represented his community 
with bravery and courage. It is heroes like Mr. Hale that remind us of 
what it means to truly be a servant to your community. It is with great 
pride that I congratulate Mr. Hale on his retirement, and I sincerely 
thank him for his service to the community.
I rise today to commemorate the 40th 
anniversary of ``Almanac, the iconic Twin Cities PBS television show 
and the longest-running primetime TV program in Minnesota history. On 
December 7, 1984, Almanac broadcast its first episode, beaming in-depth 
coverage of state and federal public affairs into Minnesotans homes. 
Forty years later, the program continues to inform audiences every 
Friday evening about the latest developments in politics, government, 
history, culture, sports, and more.
  Today, program hosts Eric Eskola and Cathy Wurzer are joined by 
reporters Mary Lahammer and Kaomi Lee, in addition to local 
personalities Kevin Kling, Sheletta Brundidge, Tane Danger, Paul 
Douglas, Larry Fitzgerald, Sr., and others. Under the guidance of 
producer Kari Kennedy and a variety of expert guests and public 
figures, this team uses their deep knowledge of our state to provide 
analysis, entertain, and inform viewers about the issues shaping 
Minnesotans lives.
  Throughout its 40 years, Almanac has played a special role in 
Minnesota politics as a source of in-depth reporting, thoughtful 
analysis, and even music and humor. This Friday night TV staple has 
enhanced our state by fostering respectful discussion across party 
lines and informing viewers in every corner of Minnesota. Mr. Speaker, 
please join me in celebrating the 40th Anniversary of Almanac, a 
trusted and reliable pillar of journalism in Minnesota, broadcast on 
Twin Cities Public Television and livestreamed via the PBS App every 
Friday night at 7:00 p.m. Central.
I rise today one final time in 
this sacred chamber to thank my neighbors in the Third District of New 
Jersey for the honor of getting to represent them in Congress over 
these past six years.
  It is an honor that I never thought I would have. This was the 
district my parents chose to create a life and build a family. This was 
the district that raised me. I went to public schools in the same area 
I represent now. I played little league on the same fields I drive by 
heading to meet constituents. Its these places--and these people--that 
shaped me. I am forever grateful for that.
  As I grew up, I watched my parents--my mother, a nurse, and my 
father, a medical researcher working to find cures for cancer and 
Alzheimers--work to give back to the community that gave us 
everything. They had a saying that service isnt just a job, its a way 
of life. And so, it was for my community and for my parents that I 
served.
  If service is a way of life, then its important that you start by 
understanding the people you serve. To do that, I held at least one 
town hall every month I served--81 in total--to hear directly from the 
people I represent. Sometimes, those people didnt agree with me. 
Oftentimes, I came away learning something new. Every time, I walked 
away with a renewed dedication to working for them--no matter who they 
supported or how they labeled themselves.
  From town halls to small business walks to tours of organizations 
just trying to help, I carry with me still a million conversations that 
inspired me. Whether it was the Superstorm Sandy survivors who just 
wanted a fair process in rebuilding, volunteers at food pantries who 
just wanted to make sure that their neighbors didnt go without a good 
meal, or those military families who were looking for ways to give back 
after their service was over, I want to say thank you for every 
constituent who helped give me purpose.
  It was that purpose that drove my actions. Last month, I helped to 
cut the ribbon on a brand new VA health clinic in Ocean County--one of 
my first major priorities and a reminder that there should be no 
mountain too big to move to help our veterans. As a member of the House 
Armed Services Committee, I was proud to deliver wins for our 
servicemembers, their families, and my own community. From pay raises 
to better health care to improved childcare, I would like to thank 
every person who served and for the honor of getting to work for you as 
a member of the House. And it was the purpose I derived from those 
conversations that helped me start to lay the groundwork for building a 
brighter future for our state. From delivering on infrastructure and 
passing bills like the CHIPS and Science Act and the Inflation 
Reduction Act to make investments in the jobs of the future, we can 
better prepare New Jersey to lead in the rest of the 21st century.
  If there is one thing I am most proud of during my six years 
representing my community in the House, it is the seemingly small acts 
that made a massive difference to our constituents. The thousands of 
casework cases closed and tens of millions of dollars returned back to 
our community showed that public service can make an impact. It doesnt 
matter if it was a passport expedited so a grandparent could see their 
new grandchild or critical Medicare or VA benefits secured so someone 
could put food on the table and pay rent, this work mattered and was 
our way of giving back.
  No member of Congress does this alone. While our names are on the 
doors, its the people behind the doors that work every day to serve 
and make our communities better. I want to thank each and every one of 
them for their hard work--often under very difficult conditions--to 
give back. Every win that I have been lucky enough to achieve is theirs 
too. As a thank you, I would like to submit their names for the record 
so that they can be properly recognized for the imprint theyve made on 
this district.
  My current team: Elizabeth Antonowicz, Marshall Burkhardt, Thomas 
Carnes, Amanda Carte, Anna Connole, Anthony DeAngelo, Kristen Foca, Ben 
Giovine, Danielle Giulino, Gabriela Hartney, Julianna Heck, Jason 
Ingle, Catherine Melman-Kenny, Hafiza Kazi, Amy Oliver, Amy Pfeiffer, 
Nikitha Rai, Forrest Rilling, Jerome Townsend, Lynette Whiteman.
  Previous staff: Riham Amin, Sharon Anderson, Hillary Caron, Anna 
Conn, Gianna Djuric, Sophie Friedfeld-Gebaide, Sean Gregory, Sarah 
Izaak, Benjamin Kamens, Matthew Knowlton, Yujin Lee, Benjamin Olarsch, 
Susan Pansius, Antoinette Miles, Nathan Riggins, Cecily Scott Martin, 
Thomas Smith, Tyrus Stokes-Ballard, Virginia Walkey, Maura Weaver.
  As I look ahead at my new role getting to serve my state, I do so 
with excitement and humility. I look forward to get to serve my 
community again--this time in the United States Senate--but always 
remembering the work done, the conversations had, and words that will 
forever echo from my parents, that service isnt a job, its truly a 
way of life.
on December 5, 2024, I was not recorded on 
Roll Call Nos. 484, 485, 486, 487, 488, 489, 490 and 491. Had I been 
present, I would have voted ``YEA on Roll Call Nos. 484, 485, 486, 
487 and 488 and voted ``NAY on Roll Call Nos. 489, 490 and 491.
MONTGOMERY, FOR HER EXCELLENT WORK ON BEHALF OF MINNESOTAS THIRD 
                              of minnesota
Mr Speaker, I rise today to recognize my Policy Advisor 
and Senior Constituent Advocate, Meg Montgomery, for her work on behalf 
of every constituent in Minnesotas Third Congressional District. I 
could not be more proud or grateful for her service.
  Meg Montgomery was raised in Minnesotas Third Congressional 
District. After graduating from Robbinsdale Armstrong High School, she 
moved to North Carolina to attend Duke University where she obtained 
both a degree in Biology and the ability to be completely insufferable 
during March Madness. Meg spent a decade to New York, NY where she 
completed her Masters in Public Health and worked in a variety of 
health systems administration roles. Eventually she returned to 
Minnesota and began working for me in March of 2019, where she has 
covered both outreach and legislative activities in a variety of issue 
areas including healthcare, environment, energy, agriculture, aging, 
and education. The only things Meg loves more than health policy are 
her husband Dan and three children Rory, Montgomery (Monty), and 
Frances Miller.
  As hilarious as she is brilliant, Meg always has a meme at the ready 
for any, and all situations. Her quiet wit and good questions always 
leave an impact on those around her. She provides invaluable advice on 
any situation and has the best style around. Meg is incredibly humble 
but should be so proud of her work in my office. She has helped me 
introduce several bills including: The ADINA Act requiring the same 
labeling standards for drugs as those that already exist for food; The 
School Access to Naloxone Act which would provide funding for and 
training on opioid reversal agents in schools; and The Expanding Health 
Care Options for First Responders Act which would create a Medicare 
buy-in program for first responders for the years between retirement 
and Medicare eligibility.
  Meg has an extraordinary talent of turning a compelling constituent 
story into impactful legislation that will improve lives. She has 
created a unique role for herself serving as a policy and outreach 
staffer from the district office, which allows her the opportunity to 
leverage deep stakeholder relationships in older to inform the 
Congressmans legislative initiatives. Learning the legislative process 
while in the DC office is one thing, handling from the district is 
another matter. Meg is a bridge builder across various constituent 
groups to gather perspectives and gain valuable knowledge. She 
routinely guides me and our team through complex policy issues to make 
informed decisions. She is an excellent representative of me in the 
community and a trusted and high-performing team member.
  The people of Minnesotas Third Congiessional District were lucky to 
have her dedication and leadership, and she will be dearly missed. I 
wish Meg all the best in her future endeavors and thank her for over 
five years of faithful set vice to this Nation in my office.
Im honored to recognize Technical Sergeant 
(TSgt) Lacey McCuean on her retirement from the United States Air 
Force.
  TSgt McCuean enlisted into the Air National Guard on March 15, 2023, 
with the 171st Air Refueling Wing with a Personnel AFSC. She quickly 
distinguished herself through exceptional dedication and service, 
taking it upon herself to initiate and revamp ten Squadron file plans 
and earning an outstanding score during staff-assisted visits. TSgt 
McCuean completed 30 promotion packages--no mean feat, and true 
commitment to developing her peers.
  Then transitioning to the 193rd Special Operations Wing, TSgt McCuean 
played a pivotal role in enhancing mission readiness by enlisting 55 
new Airmen, briefing over 1,000 individuals on Air National Guard 
opportunities, and mentoring future leaders through the Junior Reserve 
Officer Training Corps. She was a key figure during Operation Allies 
Welcome, serving in a senior leadership role, and streamlining in-
processing operations that reduced reception time by 25 percent for 
three lodging compounds for over 16,500 refugees, and chaired the 
Commanders support staff for a 200-member squadron.
  In addition to exemplary service, TSgt McCuean volunteered at local 
food banks aiding over 1,000 at-risk families, while balancing her 
academics, maintaining a 3.5 GPA, and earning a dual Bachelors degree 
in business and non-profit leadership. TSgt McCuean is known by her 
peers for her remarkable energy, demeanor, confidence, leadership 
skills, and contagious morale.
, Im honored and privileged to congratulate Technical 
Sergeant Lacey McCuean on her well-earned retirement. Her tireless and 
faithful service to our Commonwealth and Nation sets the standard by 
which we all should be judged.
Im honored and privileged to recognize the 
Chambers Hill Fire Company on its 70th Anniversary.
  The Chambers Hill Fire Company in Swatara Township, Dauphin County, 
was founded in 1954. Its charter, espousing that the ``terms of its 
existence is perpetual, speaks clearly and loudly with regard to its 
tireless commitment to service. The Company initially bought a 1923 
Hahn pumper from Goodwill Fire Company of Enhaut, and a 1942 Mercury 
ambulance from Steelton to provide the best possible fire protection 
and emergency medical services to Township residents. The Companys 
founding members then built a station on Chambers Hill Road, which the 
Company has occupied ever since, over time expanding and modernizing 
the historic building.
  From its humble beginnings, the Chambers Hill Fire Company has earned 
the American Red Cross award for ``Top Shelter in Dauphin County, and 
the Pennsylvania Department of State Keystone Democracy Award for ``5th 
Precinct of 9,000 for being an excellent voting site. In addition to 
myriad awards and recognitions, the Company performs numerous and 
varied community services, including--but not limited to--the Bethesda 
Mission Womens Shelter, Chambers Hill United Methodist Church, 
Princess Club for disadvantaged girls, Boy Scouts, Girl Scouts, Paxton 
Street Home, and the Hershey Medical Center.
  The Chambers Hill Fire Company is run by volunteers who selflessly 
give of their personal time, energy, and treasure while risking their 
personal safety for the community they love; a long-lasting tradition 
in America and one that the Company intends to continue. The Company 
honors the legacy of many exceptional members theyve lost over the 
years, to include, but not limited to: former Fire Chief Bill Metka; 
Jiggs Landvater; Earl Caton; former Treasurer Harry ``Bo Speelman; 
former Steward Rick Moyer; and longtime Firefighter, Emergency Medical 
Technician, and Chief Jack Wolfersberger. Saving lives and performing 
countless hours of unpaid service, their mantra that ``Nothing is as 
strong as the heart of a Volunteer is heard strongly and loudly.
, Im honored and privileged to recognize the Chambers 
Hill Fire Company on the auspicious occasion of their 70th Anniversary. 
On behalf of a grateful 10th District of Pennsylvania, the Commonwealth 
of Pennsylvania, and the United States of America, their service sets 
the standard by which we all should be judged.
I rise today to recognize Angie Giancarlo, 
a valued staff member of the House Committee on Appropriations, who has 
25 years of experience working in the federal government. Her 
commitment to our country exemplifies the hard work and commitment of 
an esteemed public servant.
  Angie began her government career in 1999 when she joined the U.S. 
Senate Committee on Environment and Public Works as a Staff Assistant. 
She was eventually promoted to Professional Staff Member. During her 
time on the Committee, she had a major hand in securing key 
legislation, such as the Water Resources Development Act of 2007 and 
the Safe Accountable Flexible Transportation Equity Act--A Legacy for 
Users.
  In 2011, Angie took her twelve years of policy expertise to the House 
Committee on Appropriations, specifically the Subcommittee on Energy 
and Water Development and Related Agencies, where she would oversee 
accounts pertaining to the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers civil works 
program, U.S. Bureau of Reclamation, and Department of Energys power 
marketing administrations and petroleum reserves programs.
  In September of 2017, Angie became Majority Clerk and Staff Director 
for the Energy and Water Development and Related Agencies Subcommittee. 
Her achievements during that Congress include the enactment of the 
Energy and Water Development Appropriations Acts for Fiscal Year 2018 
and Fiscal Year 2019.
  When the House Majority switched hands in 2019, Angie continued to 
serve as Minority Clerk during the 116th and 117th Congress. In the 
Minority, Angie fought and secured many conservative priorities in the 
final full-year bills.
  Her extensive experience earned her the position of Majority Clerk 
and Staff Director of the Subcommittee at the beginning of the 118th 
Congress. In times of divided government, her ability to negotiate 
resulted in significant wins. Her efforts to find common ground also 
led to the completion of the Energy and Water Development 
Appropriations Act for Fiscal Year 2024.
  It is my distinct honor to recognize Angies significant 
contributions to the federal government and our Committee as she 
transitions from her role in Congress to her next endeavor. Her 
tireless commitment, characterized by countless early mornings and late 
nights, has been invaluable to our country. Her expertise and knowledge 
on energy and water issues will be greatly missed. I wish Angie the 
best in the adventures to come, and I thank her for her dedicated 
service to the United States of America.
I rise today to pay tribute to and honor 
the life and legacy of a good friend, Rev. Dr. Timothy J. Bowman. Dr. 
Bowman, a retired United Methodist minister who resided in Columbia, 
South Carolina, was a native of Sumter, South Carolina. He was the son 
of the late Thomie Elizabeth and Jake Bowman.
  Dr. Bowman earned an Associate of Arts degree from Sumter Area 
Technical College and both Associate of Arts and Bachelor of Arts 
degrees from the University of South Carolina. He also received a 
Master of Divinity degree from Gammon Theological Seminary (ITC) in 
Atlanta, Georgia, and a Doctor of Ministry degree from Columbia 
Theological Seminary in Decatur, Georgia.
  An ordained United Methodist minister, Dr. Bowman was actively 
involved in both church and community initiatives. He previously served 
as Vice Chairperson of the Dorchester County Community Action Agency 
Board of Directors and was a member of the Dorchester County Head Start 
Policy Council and the South Carolina Head Start Association. 
Additionally, he served on the Jenkins Orphanage Board of Trustees in 
Charleston, South Carolina, the Medical Ministry Board of Directors, 
and the Charleston Mayors Advisory Committee. During his tenure at Old 
Bethel UMC, Dr. Bowman developed the Old Bethel UMC Outreach Youth 
Alternative Program in downtown Charleston, South Carolina.
  Dr. Bowman served as a member of the South Carolina Conference UMC 
Board of Ministry, the Walterboro District UMC Board of Ministry, and 
the Walterboro District Committee on District Superintendent. He also 
served on the Board of Trustees for Gammon Theological Seminary and was 
a member of its Founders Day Committee. A lifelong advocate for social 
justice, he was an active member of the NAACP.
  A proud member of the Phi Beta Sigma Fraternity, Inc., Dr. Bowman was 
also active in Free and Accepted Masonry. He achieved the 32nd degree 
and held numerous positions of distinction, including Master, Royal 
Arch, Knights Templar, Consistory, Eastern Star, and Shriners. He was 
also active with the Lincoln High School Preservation Alumni 
Association (LHSPAA).
, Dr. Bowman served as a Marine Corps Corporal and was 
wounded in combat during his service in Vietnam, earning him the Purple 
Heart. He was married to Mrs. Yvonne Davis Bowman, and they were 
blessed with four daughters: Chenoa Franklin (deceased), Dr. Pamela 
Bowman, Shenelle Bowman, and Jacobi Bowman. He was also a devoted 
grandfather to two grandchildren, Seth Franklin and Sydney Bloome.
I rise to pay tribute to a longstanding 
employer in Eastover, South Carolina. The Sylvamo Eastover Mill is 
celebrating 40 years of operation, and I join them in marking this 
significant occasion.
  Sylvamo operates some of the most technologically advanced paper 
mills in the world and is driven by the promise of paper to educate, 
communicate, and entertain. The Eastover Mill is the largest, lowest-
cost producer of uncoated freesheet paper in North America and the 
fourth-largest manufacturing employer in Richland County, South 
Carolina. Iconic paper brands like Hammermill, HP, and Williamsburg are 
all produced at the Eastover Mill, along with a variety of paper 
products that are staples of American businesses and homes.
  Sylvamos Eastover Mill proudly employs 800 men and women and 
supports over 5,000 additional jobs in related industries in 
surrounding communities. Additionally, through its Community Council, 
the Mill has demonstrated a longterm commitment to listening to and 
addressing community concerns.
  Over the last few years, Sylvamo has provided several hundred 
thousand dollars to local nonprofits like Transitions Homeless 
Services, Harvest Hope Food Bank, and the local United Way. Employees 
participate in

community cleanup days, Reading Is Fundamental book giveaways with 
local schools, the Lunch Buddies School Program, and holiday events 
with the Eastover Senior Resources Group. In honor of Eastovers 40th 
anniversary, Sylvamo has also pledged an additional $40,000 donation to 
local organizations, including Webber Elementary, Richland County 
Library, Mother DeVeaux Adult Day Care, and Harvest Hope Food Bank.
  The Eastover Mill and Sylvamo are also committed to the long-term 
health of our forests and ecosystems. They partner with Forest 
Stewardship Council (FSC) and Sustainable Forestry Initiative (SFI)-
certified suppliers to ensure that the fiber used in their paper 
products is harvested from responsibly managed forests in surrounding 
areas. The Mill also proudly produces over 90 percent of its energy in-
house from renewable, carbon-neutral biomass residuals.
  As part of its 2030 Sustainability Goals, Sylvamo is committed to 
increasing workforce diversity by achieving 30 percent womens 
representation, 35 percent women in leadership, and 25 percent minority 
representation in North American salaried positions alongside specific 
regional targets.
, I ask that you and our colleagues join me in 
congratulating Sylvamos Eastover Mill on its 40th Anniversary. The 
Eastover Mill is a shining example of the future of American 
manufacturing--producing the paper we rely on responsibly and 
sustainably, supporting family-wage jobs, and contributing to the 
Eastover and Richland County communities. I wish Sylvamo continued 
prosperity and success in the years to come.