it is my privilege to recognize Mt. Zion 
Baptist Church on the celebration of its 150th anniversary this year.
  Founded 1873 in Williamson Creek, this church soon faced its first 
challenges. Only 10 years after its founding, a flood destroyed the 
church building. Through resilience and faith, the congregation 
worshipped and held services in their homes while their community 
rebuilt what was lost.
  In 1948, the old walls of Mt. Zion Williamson Creek were transported 
and reinstalled at their new home in Austin, where it became Mt. Zion 
Missionary Baptist Church. Beginning in 1970, under the leadership of 
the late Rev. Dr. G. V. Clark, the church experienced a large increase 
in membership and expanded its facilities on and around East 13th 
Street. With a deep commitment to his faith and community, Dr. Clark 
served the congregants of Mt. Zion for five decades. Our whole 
community is greatly indebted to him for a lifetime of service.
  For over 150 years, Mt. Zion has been a pillar of East Austin. Under 
the current leadership of Reverend Dr. Daryl Horton, Mt. Zion continues 
a tradition of commitment and service to our community through charity 
and volunteerism, like housing the elderly, feeding children, and the 
poor. As the Congressman for the 35th District of Texas. I am proud to 
congratulate them on their 150 years of faithful service and dedication 
to improving the lives of so many in Austin.
I rise today to celebrate the life and 
legacy of Pastor Ralph

E. Kelly, Sr. who was welcomed home with the Lord on December 21, 2022.
  Pastor Kelly accepted the call of ministry in 1985 as the assistant 
pastor at Good News Church of Christ Holiness U.S.A. in Pasadena, CA. 
Six years later, God moved Pastor Kelly and his family to Colorado 
Springs where he served at Focus on the Family for 23 years.
  On September 6, 1992, Pastor Kelly and his family joined two other 
families to establish Good News Church, initialing meeting in a small 
room at New Hope Baptist Church. Good News Church mission statement was 
founded on Matthew 28; 18-20, ``Reaching families and our community 
with the transforming power of Jesus Christ through Evangelism, 
Education, and Exhortation.
  In addition to shepherding local congregations such as Good News 
Church, Pastor Kelly served the Pikes Peak Region for over 23 years. As 
the Regional Manager of Pastoral Ministries in California and Colorado 
under the leadership of H.B London Jr. Pastor Kelly graced and served 
other pastors of every denomination and faith. He provided 
encouragement and counsel to countless pastors and their families.
  Pastor Kelly and his wife, Daisy together raised four children: 
Darnell, Nicole, Crystal, and Ralph, Jr. Their family heritage 
continues with nine grandchildren: Amari, Jocelyn, Savannah, KaiLon, 
McKenzie, Justice, Kennedy, KaiLynn and Brooklynn. Pastor Kelly and 
Daisy blessed the Colorado Springs community by living out the example 
of how to bring your family up in the Lord. Further, as evidence of 
their true ministry partnership, Pastor Kelly and Daisy together 
received their Bachelor of Religious Education from the United 
Theological Bible College &amp; Seminary in 1998, in Colorado Springs.
  Pastor Kellys life of ministry to pastors epitomizes the pastoral 
epistles, ``I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I 
have kept the faith: Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of 
righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous judge, shall give me at 
that day; and not to me only, but unto all them also that love His 
appearing, (2 Tim. 4:7-8). Rest in peace Christian Soldier; his duty 
has ended. He has fought the good fight.
I rise today to ask my colleagues to 
join me in congratulating Blair Oaks High School on their

victory in Missouris Class 3 Volleyball State Championship.
  The team claimed the Class 3 title for the third straight year by 
beating the Ursuline Bears in a tightly contested match. After falling 
behind early, Seniors Gabby Horn and Autumn Bax led the Lady Falcons to 
an improbable comeback in the final three sets. The team should be 
commended for all their hard work throughout the past year and for 
bringing home another state championship to their school and community.
, please join me in recognizing the Blair Oaks volleyball 
team for a job well done.
Speaker, I rise to congratulate April and Keith 
Peterson and the River Rock Outfitter team on their hard-earned 
nomination for the United States Chamber of Commerces 2023 Top Small 
Business award.
  Located in Downtown Fredericksburg, River Rock Outfitter provides 
apparel, gear, and guided outdoor experiences to customers while 
bringing awareness to local recreational opportunities in the region. 
River Rock Outfitters is committed to supporting access to recreation 
and conservation efforts in the community and is widely known for its 
friendly and knowledgeable staff. Notably, over 70 percent of its staff 
are women--actively challenging gender biases in the outdoor sector and 
creating an inviting environment for women to explore the outdoors 
through their programming, like their GirlsGO! initiative.
  In response to supply chain backlogs and an increased interest in the 
outdoors during the pandemic, April and her team implemented the ``Re-
Boot with River Rock consignment program. This initiative expanded 
River Rock Outfitters reach to a national level, encouraged people 
across the country to explore the outdoors, and promoted 
sustainability.
  Aprils contributions as an owner extend past River Rock Outfitters 
storefront--she has become a prominent fixture in the community as an 
active member of the Fredericksburg Virginia Main Street, serving as 
its president from 2020 to 2021. She has also earned multiple accolades 
from organizations such as the Rotary Foundation, Chesapeake 
Conservancy, and Blue Ridge Outdoors, for her contributions to the 
community and philanthropy.
  River Rock Outfitter has embraced community, inclusivity and 
representation, and sustainability throughout their journey. These 
attributes distinguish them as an outstanding small business, and 
Fredericksburg is lucky to have them in our community.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in celebrating River Rock 
Outfitter, a finalist for the U.S. Chamber of Commerces 2023 Top Small 
Business award.
had I been present for votes on November 
2, 2023, I would have voted in the following manner: Roll Call No. 579 
on the Crane Amendment No. 85, I would have voted No; Roll Call No. 580 
on the Crane Amendment No. 86, I would have voted No: Roll Call No. 581 
on the Fulcher Amendment No. 89, I would have voted No; Roll Call No. 
582 on the Gosar Amendment No. 91, I would have voted No; Roll Call No. 
583 on the Greene Amendment No. 94, I would have voted No; Roll Call 
No. 584 on the McCormick Amendment No. 101, I would have voted No; Roll 
Call No. 585 on the McCormick Amendment No. 102, I would have voted No; 
Roll Call No. 586 on the Miller Amendment No. 103, I would have voted 
No; Roll Call No. 587 on the Nehls Amendment No. 107, I would have 
voted No; Roll Call No. 588 on the Norman Amendment No. 110, I would 
have voted No; Roll Call No. 589 on the Norman Amendment No. 112, I 
would have voted No; Roll Call No. 590 on the Norman Amendment No. 113, 
I would have voted No; Roll Call No. 591 on the Norman Amendment No. 
115, I would have voted No; and Roll Call No. 592 on the Ogles 
Amendment No. 116, I would have voted No.
I rise today to recognize a first responder 
in my district, Tom Fennell. Tom has been nominated for the American 
Ambulance Associations Star of Life Award; a prestigious recognition 
given to those who have made exceptional contributions to the emergency 
medical services (EMS) community.
  Toms journey into emergency medical services began in his childhood, 
growing up with ambulances in his garage. His father owned a local 
ambulance service, instilling in Tom a deep appreciation for the 
lifesaving work of EMS providers.
  After leaving home, Tom continued to his involvement in EMS, working 
with a Basic Life Support ambulance service which he helped evolve into 
an Advanced Life Support service.
  Toms dedication and expertise were evident and he quickly became 
recognized as a leader in the field. He went on to serve as a regulator 
for the State of Minnesotas EMS Section, gaining valuable insights 
into the challenges faced by ambulance service providers across the 
state.
  Tom has made a profound impact on the emergency medical services 
community in St. Cloud and across Minnesota. He is an inspiration to 
all those who have had the opportunity to work alongside him.
  Throughout the years, we have been grateful to see many exceptional 
Minnesotans honored as American Ambulance Association Star of Life 
recipients. Americas first female Emergency Medical Technician and 
Star of Life Recipient, Rose Pelzel, and her fellow Star of Life 
recipient, Marcia Anderson, were both panelists in our offices Young 
Womens Leadership Program. Both women are pioneers in the emergency 
medical services field, and we were lucky to have them participate.
  Congratulations to Tom on joining these impressive ranks, and I thank 
him for all his work on behalf of EMTs and first responders in 
Minnesota.
I rise today to honor the life of Mr. 
William Thomas Chartrand, who tragically passed away on October 3, 
2023. at the age of 82.
, New York to Ernest and Eva Chartrand. 
He was the middle of five children. From an early age, he learned the 
values of hard work and perseverance, spending his youth working on a 
farm in upstate New York. Mr. Chartrand joined the U.S. Navy shortly 
after high school, where he served as a jet engine mechanic. Mr. 
Chartrand retired having achieved the rank of Chief Petty Officer. Some 
of his fondest memories were from his time spent as a navigator on an 
A-3 Skywarrior Aircraft. During his more than twenty years of service, 
he developed lifelong friendships with his fellow officers, and kept in 
close contact with them throughout his life.
  After retiring from the Navy, Mr. Chartrand moved to Hanford, where 
he attended College of the Sequoias and earned his associate of arts 
degree. He was later hired by Sears, Roebuck and Co., and received 
training in appliance repair in Los Angeles and Chicago. After a long 
career with the company, Mr. Chartrand started his own appliance repair 
business in Hanford. Mr. Chartrand was passionate about helping his 
friends and family with their appliances and continued to lend a 
helping hand in his retirement. This past May, Mr. Chartrand and his 
wife. Velma, celebrated 36 years of marriage, Together, they devoted 
themselves to their Christian faith. Mr. Chartrand served on the 
Diaconate for First Baptist Hanford in his later years. He is 
remembered by his loved ones and members of the Hanford community for 
his kind spirit and compassion for everyone he crossed paths with.
, I ask all my colleagues in the House of Representatives 
to join me in honoring the incredible life of Mr. William Thomas 
Chartrand. His service to our country, commitment to his family, and 
dedication to the Central Valley community will be felt for generations 
to come. My thoughts and prayers are with his family during this 
difficult time.
I rise to honor Sergeant First Class 
William Montgomery, a true American hero who has finally been awarded 
the Purple Heart for injuries suffered in the line of duty in service 
to our great country. The price of freedom is not free, and I am 
overjoyed that my office can help heroes like Sergeant First Class 
Montgomery receive the recognition they so richly deserve.
  Sergeant First Class Montgomery was born in Tucson, Arizona, and 
graduated high school in Spring Creek, Nevada. He enlisted in the U.S. 
Army as a 19D Cavalry Scout and attended One Station Unit Training in 
Fort Knox, Kentucky, graduating with honors. His long and distinguished 
military career includes deployments in Operations Enduring Freedom and 
Iraqi Freedom, where he earned numerous awards and accolades including 
the Bronze Star, the Meritorious Service Medal, the Army Commendation 
Medal, the Valorous Unit Award, and the Iraq Campaign Medal with 3 
Stars, reflecting his exceptional service to our country. He has now 
earned the Purple Heart, an award reserved only for those who are 
wounded or killed in service to our nation. In July of 2015, Sergeant 
First Class Montgomery was medically discharged from the United States 
Army and now resides in Colorados Third District with his six 
wonderful children: Rain, Porter, Lexington, Izabella, Kai, and Koda.
, Sergeant First Class Montgomerys service is a shining 
example for all Americans. His distinguished career has been marked 
with selfless courage and an unwavering willingness to put everything 
on the line for our nation and everything it stands for. I urge all 
Americans to join me in congratulating Sergeant First Class Montgomery 
for receiving the Purple Heart and for being a beacon of American pride 
and inspiration for Colorados Third Congressional District and 
America.
JR.
I rise today to join with the congregation 
of Cathedral International in honoring Bishop Donald Hilliard, Jr. on 
his 40th Pastoral Anniversary. Bishop Hilliards dedication to faith 
and community are truly deserving of this bodys recognition.
  As Senior Pastor of Cathedral International, Dr. Hilliard has ushered 
immense expansion of the church. When Dr. Hilliard became Senior Pastor 
at the age of 26, there were 125 congregants; today membership has 
grown to 10,000 and serves the communities of Perth Amboy, Asbury Park, 
and Plainfield. His vision to embrace technology and add streaming 
capabilities to the church not only allows the church to reach those 
who are unable to worship in person, but also served the full 
congregation during the COVID-19 pandemic.
  Throughout his tenure, Dr. Hilliard has encouraged his congregants to 
practice faith in action, serving the needs of people through several 
worship and outreach ministries. Likewise, the Cathedral Community 
Development Corporation that Dr. Hilliard founded provides support and 
services to uplift the local community. His leadership has fostered 
greater spirituality, fellowship, and community involvement of diverse 
populations.
  His contributions to the community have been recognized with several 
awards and board positions, including the Drew University Martin Luther 
King, Jr. Humanitarian Award, the National Conference for Community and 
Justice Humanitarian Award, and the Perth Amboy Chamber of Commerce 
Executive of the Year Award. Additionally, he is a lifetime member of 
the NAACP.
, I sincerely hope my colleagues will join me in 
congratulating Bishop Donald Hilliard, Jr. on his 40th Pastoral 
Anniversary. Dr. Hilliard continues to provide outstanding spiritual 
leadership to the Perth Amboy, Asbury Park, and Plainfield communities 
and his service is to be celebrated.
Title IV of Senate Resolution 4, agreed to by the Senate of February 
4, 1977, calls for establishment of a system for a computerized 
schedule of all meetings and hearings of Senate committees, 
subcommittees, joint committees, and committees of conference. This 
title requires all such committees to notify the Office of the Senate 
Daily Digest--designated by the Rules Committee--of the time, place and 
purpose of the meetings, when scheduled and any cancellations or 
changes in the meetings as they occur.
  As an additional procedure along with the computerization of this 
information, the Office of the Senate Daily Digest will prepare this 
information for printing in the Extensions of Remarks section of the 
Congressional Record on Monday and Wednesday of each week.
  Meetings scheduled for Thursday, November 9, 2023 may be found in the 
Daily Digest of todays Record.

     10 a.m.
       Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry
         To hold hearings to examine innovation in American 
           agriculture, focusing on leveraging technology and 
           artificial intelligence.
                                                           SR-328A
       Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs
         To hold hearings to examine oversight of financial 
           regulators, focusing on protecting Main Street not Wall 
           Street.
                                                            SD-538
       Committee on Foreign Relations
         To receive a closed briefing on the current security 
           situation in the Middle East.
                                                               TBA
       Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions
         To hold hearings to examine standing up against corporate 
           greed, focusing on how unions are improving the lives 
           of working families.
                                                            SD-430
     2:30 p.m.
       Committee on Environment and Public Works
       Subcommittee on Fisheries, Water, and Wildlife
         To hold hearings to examine challenges and opportunities 
           to facilitate wildlife movement and improve migration 
           corridors.
                                                            SD-406
       Committee on Finance
       Subcommittee on Health Care
         To hold hearings to examine ensuring Medicare beneficiary 
           access, focusing on a path to telehealth permanency.
                                                            SD-215
     2:45 p.m.
       Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
       Subcommittee on Emerging Threats and Spending Oversight
         To hold hearings to examine Federal COVID-era spending 
           and preventing future fraud.
                                                            SD-562

     3 p.m.
       Committee on Rules and Administration
         Business meeting to consider S. Res. 444, providing for 
           the en bloc consideration of military nominations.
                                                            SR-301
                              NOVEMBER 15
     10 a.m.
       Committee on Environment and Public Works
         To hold hearings to examine opportunities in industrial 
           decarbonization, focusing on delivering benefits for 
           the economy and the climate.
                                                            SD-406
       Committee on Foreign Relations
         To hold hearings to examine United States leadership on 
           artificial intelligence in an era of strategic 
           competition.
                                                            SD-419
       Committee on the Judiciary
         To hold hearings to examine pending nominations.
                                                            SD-226
     11 a.m.
       Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
         Business meeting to consider the nominations of Harry 
           Coker, Jr., of Kansas, to be National Cyber Director, 
           Jeff

           Rezmovic, of Maryland, to be Chief Financial Officer, 
           Department of Homeland Security, and Suzanne Elizabeth 
           Summerlin, of Florida, to be General Counsel of the 
           Federal Labor Relations Authority.
                                                            SD-562
     2:30 p.m.
       Committee on Small Business and Entrepreneurship
         To hold hearings to examine veteran entrepreneurship, 
           focusing on from service to small business success.
                                                           SR-428A
       Joint Economic Committee
         To hold hearings to examine aging Americans and a waning 
           workforce, focusing on demographic drivers of our 
           deficit.
                                                               TBA
     3:30 p.m.
       Committee on Veterans Affairs
         To hold hearings to examine VAs Fourth Mission, focusing 
           on supporting our nations emergency preparedness and 
           response.
                                                            SR-418
I rise today to recognize and remember the 
life of a dedicated veteran upon his induction into the Ohio Veterans 
Hall of Fame. Donald James Keehan, who sadly passed away last year, has 
been inducted posthumously after his years of service and contributions 
to his community and Ohio.
  Donalds leadership both in and out of uniform was exemplary, whether 
it was through his service to our nation in the Korean War or as 
founder and CEO of globally recognized Advanced Polymer Coatings. His 
work as an entrepreneur in the polymers and resins industry included 
numerous patents and the development of multiple companies that 
employed many Ohioans.
  It was Donalds philanthropic work with youth and military families 
that established him as a community leader when it came to support for 
military families, military transition issues, and the broader 
Northeast Ohio veterans community. He was instrumental in providing 
housing for wounded warriors with his rental properties in northeast 
Ohio. He was also a tremendous mentor to both the professional business 
community and to the youth of the area.
  Passionate about philanthropy, Donald supported education by 
providing more than one million dollars to St. Edward High School in 
Lakewood, Ohio, where he served as a trustee, for students to study 
innovative engineering and entrepreneurship. He also supported and 
helped grow Young Mens Chance for Change whose mission is to help 
inner-city young men achieve better lives and opportunities.
  Donalds life also revolved around his family. He was married to his 
wife, Arlene, for 63 years. During that time, they raised six children 
and became grandparents and then great-grandparents.
, I ask our colleagues to join me in paying special 
tribute to the life and service of Donald James Keehan. On behalf of 
the people of the Fifth Congressional District of Ohio, I recognize the 
devotion and compassion that Donald had for his family, community, and 
Nation. I applaud the special acknowledgment that accompanies his 
induction into the Ohio Veterans Hall of Fame.