I rise today to congratulate Naya 
Stamets. Naya is an extraordinary leader with a heart as bold and 
inspiring as her mission. Its the only way you get to receive the most 
prestigious award in Girl Scouting, the Gold Award. She earned this 
award by turning her personal battle with Type 1 Diabetes into a 
powerful PSA, raising awareness of the condition one person at a time.
  It is so wonderful to have Naya as my constituent from Farmington, 
New Mexico. She is one of New Mexicos golden treasures.
  She has been a member of the Girl Scouts of New Mexico Trails, Troop 
10068 for 13 years. She is now a first-year undergraduate student at 
New Mexico Tech studying Mechanical Engineering and Digital Media--go 
Miners.
  To earn the prestigious Girl Scout Gold Award, high school-age Girl 
Scouts must identify and investigate an issue they care about, devise a 
plan, and then lead a team of experts and community members to 
implement a project that produces lasting change.
  In pursuit of this prestigious award, Naya created a PSA video with 
the help of medical professionals to educate the community about T1D 
symptoms, prevention, and management. Nayas PSA titled ``SEE T1D 
will have a positive impact on our New Mexico community for years to 
come.
  Naya was inspired to create this PSA after a life-threatening 
emergency in her childhood, where she learned she had Type 1 Diabetes 
(T1D). As she grew older, she noticed the lack of T1D education in her 
community. At the end of the PSA, Naya included a QR code to a Google 
Form, which asks people if they experience any T1D symptoms and if 
someone selects 4 or more then it immediately tells them to contact 
their physician.
  As a result of her PSA, she has been able to collect over 50 survey 
responses and speak with 4 individuals who sought help after seeing her 
video and survey. Two people were able to get a diagnosis for early 
onset diabetes after consulting with their doctor and two others 
learned they had other underlying health issues.
  In addition, Naya was able to present her research and PSA to the 
International Order of the Rainbow Girls, where she shared her findings 
with over 100 people from across the U.S. ranging from Connecticut, 
Kansas, Ohio, and California.

  On behalf of the 3rd Congressional District of New Mexico, I 
congratulate Naya for achieving the highest distinction in Girl Scouts, 
the Gold Award. We are so proud of her.
I rise today to honor Dr. Renel 
Brooks-Moon as she receives the Key to the City of San Francisco from 
Mayor London Breed. This prestigious recognition is a testament to 
Renels extraordinary contributions to our community and her 
trailblazing career in broadcasting and sports.
  Born in Oakland to her beloved educator parents Nathaniel and Juanita 
Brooks, who inspired her path to achievement and amazing journey and 
success story, becoming one of the most beloved women luminaries in the 
Bay Area.
  A Woodside High School and Mills College graduate, she began her 
broadcasting career at KCBS and KFRC before breaking through at 106 
KMEL in 1986. Later, she woke up the San Francisco Bay Area with her 
iconic ``Renel In The Morning show on 98.1 KISS-FM.
  She became the San Francisco Giants public address announcer in 2000 
and excelled in the position for 24 years.
  As one of the first Black women in this role, Renel broke barriers 
and made history in Major League Baseball. She was the first woman to 
announce a world championship game in any professional sport and the 
first to announce MLBs All-Star Game.
  Renel Brooks-Moon has had a profound impact on our community, not 
only entertaining and informing us but also being a role model for 
aspiring broadcasters, particularly women and people of color.
  Renels impact extends beyond broadcasting. She has volunteered in 
community service and received honorary doctorates from Mills College 
and the University of San Francisco, recognizing her contributions to 
education and society.
  Her journey from a young Giants fan to the teams iconic voice that 
Bay Area fans have loved for more than two decades exemplifies the 
power of perseverance and believing in your dreams.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in honoring Dr. Renel 
Brooks-Moon.

  Her legacy as a broadcaster, community leader, and trailblazer will 
continue to inspire, empower, and uplift the community now and for 
future generations, making her a true San Francisco Bay Area icon.
today I honor the life of Penny Etson 
Rinehart of Olney, who passed away earlier this year.
  Born in Utica, New York, in 1953, Penny later attended the University 
of Illinois, where she double-majored in psychology and social work. 
After graduating, she dedicated her career to helping others, first as 
a probation officer and then as a drug and alcohol counselor.
  While in college, Penny met Eric Reinhart, whom she married in Olney, 
Illinois, in 1977. Their marriage was a testament to love and 
partnership, filled with cherished adventures, including memorable 
beach trips to Florida.
  Above all, Penny was a devoted wife, mother, grandmother, and friend 
to all who knew her. She and Eric raised two sons, Jonathan and 
William, and were blessed with two granddaughters, Claudette and 
Camille. During this difficult time, I hold Pennys family in my 
thoughts and prayers.
  Pennys love, humor, and kindness touched the lives of many. Her 
impact will be deeply felt by those who knew her and by the Springfield 
community she called home. Penny will be greatly missed, but her legacy 
of compassion and warmth will endure.
I rise today to pay tribute to Karen Chapman, 
my District Chief of Staff and leader of my exceptional District office 
team upon her retirement from the federal government.
  Karen grew up in San Mateo County and attended local schools. A 
graduate of Castilleja in Palo Alto, she went on to receive her BA in 
history with a focus on comparative political systems from the 
University of Colorado in Boulder. For her senior thesis she conducted 
research at the University of Kent in Canterbury in conjunction with 
Cornell University, with the focus of her studies centered on political 
propaganda. While working on various political campaigns, including my 
first congressional campaign and later, former Governor Jerry Browns 
campaign for State Party Chair, Karen also participated in the 
Practical Politics Masters Program at San Francisco State University.
  During my service on the San Mateo County Board of Supervisors, Karen 
served as my Executive Assistant and Legislative Aide. At the each 
Supervisor had only two staff members, demanding that Karen had to do 
essentially everything. She also managed my schedule, planned events, 
staffed commission meetings and conducted casework and field work.
  When I was elected to Congress in l992, Karen joined me in 
Washington, D.C. as a senior staffer and helped set up the best office 
on the Hill. She returned to Palo Alto two years later to be my 
District Director.
  Karen brought her superb leadership and diplomatic skills to the 
District Office operations and established the best Congressional 
constituent services operation in the Nation, an organization known for 
getting things done right, solving difficult problems and treating each 
constituent with dignity, respect and kindness. My District operation 
includes Co-Deputy Chiefs of Staff Anne Ream and Patty Kim, Senior 
Field Representatives Nicholas Hargis and Justin Jeong; and 
Communications Director Katrina Rill, all of whom are seasoned, engaged 
and highly professional.
  There are many examples of Karens drive and dedication throughout 
the years. When the CZU fire devastated parts of my District in Santa 
Cruz County, Karen led her colleagues in the field, working alongside 
FEMA and our other partners in government. They worked nights and 
weekends along with tremendous help from Brian Perkins of Congresswoman 
Speiers office, staying in the field during the pandemic until all 
constituents had opened cases with FEMA and received local, state and 
federal help. Karen builds bridges between people, organizations and 
agencies, bringing everyone together to find solutions that are 
practical and that reflect my values.
  My Congressional District includes four federal facilities which 
require consistent support. Karen carried out this support in this 
ongoing work including advocating for USGS and NASA Ames when each was 
threatened with significant cuts by various Administrations. Karen 
staffed me, together with her D.C. counterparts on the fight to 
preserve the iconic Hangar One and retain the 129th Rescue Wings both 
located at Moffett Federal Airfield.
  Karen has been highly involved in several key projects, including the 
soon to open National Monument, Cotoni-Coast Dairies near Davenport in 
Santa Cruz County. She also worked with her D.C. counterparts to staff 
me for decades of work in the District to electrify Caltrain. This game 
changing project was completed this year for the Bay Area and will 
reduce carbon dioxide emissions by 176,000 metric tons annually.
  In true Silicon Valley spirit, our District Office operation has 
always had an innovative approach toward representing over 740,000 
people. We were the first District Office to conduct casework using 
digital signatures as a result of my legislation establishing their 
legality. This legislation allowed us to conduct casework via the 
Internet, reducing processing times and promoting greater efficiency, 
and saving significant tax dollars. We were the first Congressional 
Office in the Nation to become a `Green Congressional Office having 
worked with property owner Premier Properties. The Eshoo office 
invested in renewal energy resources, with 100 percent of the energy 
used by the Eshoo office derived from renewable resources and the 
office exceeding established green standards. Our office was the first 
where the Member of Congress established a Congressional Student 
Advisory Board (SAB) for high school students, giving voice to students 
about the legislative process. Karen and my team made sure the SAB was 
robust and every year graduated more than 100 students, while providing 
resources and information to ensure their success. Each year SAB became 
more professional and the staff time devoted to it was a significant 
and worthwhile investment.
  During the entirety of the pandemic, Karens innovative work 
continued as she remained in the office full time, and staffed me while 
I ran the Energy and Commerce Committees Subcommittee on Health from 
my home in San Mateo County. Karen adapted quickly in order for us to 
remain resilient and nimble, and through her innovation she increased 
responsiveness and productivity for committee work, casework and 
fieldwork during the pandemic and beyond in ways that kept my staff 
safe and healthy while keeping up with the unique challenges of a 
pandemic and multiple wildfires.
  Karen Chapman is a public servants servant. Shes humble, loyal, 
generous, disciplined, resourceful, and steadfast. Often sought after 
for her discretion and wise counsel, Karen has also advised campaigns 
and supported local candidates. She cares deeply about making a 
difference in peoples lives and improving their circumstances. She 
staffed me on some of my most challenging cases including seeing 
success for Carl Clark who had been denied by the Navy for his heroism 
due to racism during World War II, protecting Dr. Christine Fords 
identity before she decided to tell her story in public, and making 
sure my late friend Hank Sciaronis package was complete to receive the 
Bronze Star and Purple Heart for his courageous heroism when his plane 
was shot down behind enemy lines during World War II.
, I ask my colleagues to join me today to honor and thank 
Karen Chapman for her extraordinary dedication and exemplary service on 
behalf of the people Ive represented for over three decades. Im 
unendingly grateful to her for her sterling leadership, her 32 years of 
devoted service, and for the gift of her friendship.
I rise today to pay tribute to an 
extraordinary member of my congressional staff, Na Young Patty Kim, on 
the occasion of her retirement after serving as a member of my staff 
for over 26 years.
  Patty was born Na Young Kim in Seoul, South Korea, in 1976 to Chong 
Seung Kim and Young Suk Kim. In 1985, her parents decided to immigrate 
to the United States to pursue the American dream for their young 
daughters, Na Young and Jee Young. Landing first in San Francisco, they 
eventually settled in Newark, California. Na Young became Patty in the 
process of learning English and she learned about being a bridge for 
immigrants like herself while helping her parents navigate the 
unfamiliar system in America.
  Patty graduated from Newark Memorial High School in 1994 and went on 
to study at University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA). Although she 
was initially interested tn pursuing Business Economics, Patty 
developed a passion for political science and opted to study abroad in 
South Korea at Yonsei University to learn about international 
relations. She also participated in the University of California 
Washington Center (UCDC) program and interned with the Civil Rights 
Division of the Department of Justice in the special litigation 
section. These experiences helped her develop her passion for public 
service and in 1998, Patty graduated with a B.A. in Political Science 
and a specialization in Business Administration from UCLA.
  Following her graduation from UCLA, Patty joined our Palo Alto 
District Office for the 14th Congressional District of California in 
the heart of Silicon Valley where she began as a Staff Assistant, moved 
to be a Scheduler, then a Caseworker, a Constituent Service Director, 
and now Deputy District Chief of Staff and Senior Counsel. Patty opted 
to work full time while attending Santa Clara University School of Law, 
as a part time student. During this time, she studied abroad at Oxford 
University to obtain a Certificate in International Law and also spent 
time working for the Federal Public Defenders office in San Jose on a 
case to help acquit a defendant on death row. After graduating in May 
2005, Patty passed the California Bar exam in November and decided to 
remain in public service as my Counsel. In 2010, she married Steve Yu, 
a Marine Veteran and entrepreneur, and they have two beautiful 
children; Gloria and Michaela. While raising her two young children, 
she continued to work tirelessly to serve constituents in a diverse 
district encompassing Silicon Valley.
  Patty is an exceptional professional who truly understands the 
important connections between legislative work and constituent 
services. She works quietly behind the scenes to use her deep knowledge 
of immigration, tax, telecommunications, and high-tech issues to help 
those in need. Patty has helped thousands of constituents navigate the 
federal bureaucracy, has led a casework operation second to none, and 
been a trusted advisor in times of crisis. Over all the years, Patty 
has worked effectively with community stakeholders, federal agencies, 
and constituents to get results. Through it all, she has always been 
positive, never losing sight of the fact that we are in the business of 
hope.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in honoring the work of 
Patty Kim as she begins the next exciting chapter of her life. From the 
105th Congress to the 118th Congress, Patty Kim has proven herself to 
be a dedicated public servant and leader by working tirelessly to serve 
the people of the 14th, 18th, and 16th Congressional District through 
five administrations. Like so many women, Patty has juggled family 
commitments with work obligations to make this world a better place for 
the next generation. The American dream that Pattys parents envisioned 
for their daughters has been realized and exceeded through her 
extraordinary life of service. How proud and grateful I am to have had 
her by my side.
the San Mateo Daily Journal, an independent 
daily newspaper that covers San Mateo County, California, is in its 
25th year of publication, covering local news, community events and 
youth sports. It has become an essential part of the daily life of San 
Mateo County, and its residents look to it for accurate, fair, relevant 
and impartial local news. The paper features extensive coverage of high 
school sports, and offers a variety of opinions from local columnists, 
such as my long-time friend Mark Simon, as well as a forum for Letters 
to the Editor and longer perspective pieces. It is an essential source 
of information for local government, and steadily and responsibly 
fulfills the watchdog role inherent in a good local newspaper. It is 
the only local newspaper published in San Mateo County that publishes a 
daily edition Monday through Friday, and a combined weekend edition 
that appears Saturdays and Sundays.
  The Daily Journal was launched on August 18, 2000, with a news staff 
of two, plus advertising, production, and circulation staff. Its first 
edition contained 8 pages and its initial circulation was 5,000. Today, 
the staff includes up to 20 full-time and part-time employees and 
contract workers. The Daily Journal averages 28 pages and the 
circulation ranges from 21,000 to 30,000 daily editions. It is 
available in local cafes, stores, businesses and public and community 
gathering places and its digital edition, smdailyjournal.com, averages 
750,000 views a month.
  Co-Founder Jerry Lee has been the publisher since day one as part of 
a Berkeley-based organization that expanded its local news model to San 
Mateo County. In 2006, Lee bought the paper from the founding 
organization which went out of business, and has been the owner since.
  In an era when local newspapers are rapidly disappearing, Lee said, 
``We were able to jump out of the gate and be profitable from the 
beginning, a trend that has continued throughout the papers 25 
years.
  Editor Jon Mays came to the Daily Journal as Managing Editor in 
October of 2000 and has served as Editor in Chief since December 2001. 
Sports Editor Nathan Mollat has been with the newspaper since its 
founding. His sports pages and the special recognition given to 
individual athletes weekly, every sports season and annually creates 
lifetime memories and keepsakes for high school students and their 
families.
  The success of the paper is ``a testament to the people we have here, 
and the paper owes its success to the unique nature of San Mateo 
County. The market is more conducive to what we do, and it is one of 
the most advanced educational areas of the world, but it is still very 
much a small town--a big city in small-town clothing. The mom-and-pop 
nature of the paper fits the mom-and-pop nature of the community, Lee 
said.
  The Daily Journal contributes to ``the creation of community, 
bringing people together in an age where there are not enough 
institutions working to do that. A good local paper is important to 
have a thriving democracy, Lee said.
  The paper provides a forum for small to medium-sized advertisers who 
dont find a place for themselves in larger daily newspapers or see 
online advertising as too scattered. And the advertising is very much 
in keeping with the papers mission as a local resource that promotes a 
sense of community.
  ``Local people want to know about services. Advertising is another 
form of information. A quarter of our advertisers dont need 
advertising, they just want to support us, Lee said.
  Here is the stated mission of the Daily Journal:
  It is the mission of the Daily Journal to be the most accurate, fair 
and relevant local news source for those who live, work or play on the 
San Francisco Peninsula. By combining local news coverage, analysis and 
insight with the latest business, lifestyle, state, national and world 
news, we seek to provide our readers with the highest quality 
information resource in the local area.
  Our pages belong to our readers, and we choose to reflect the diverse 
character of this dynamic and ever-changing community.
  The Daily Journals slogan is: We report to you.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in honoring a jewel in 
the crown of my Congressional District. The San Mateo Daily Journal is 
a cherished community asset and I am exceedingly proud of all theyve 
accomplished and continue to do as they serve the people of San Mateo 
County.