I rise today to recognize and 
congratulate the Mount Arlington Fire Department on its 100th 
anniversary. This significant milestone represents a century of 
unwavering dedication, sacrifice, and service to our New Jersey 
community.
  Firefighters are the first responders to danger and the backbone of 
keeping our neighborhoods safe. They represent hope and security, 
safeguarding our homes and businesses while keeping our families safe. 
From literally and figuratively putting out the biggest fires to 
responding to medical emergencies, firefighters exemplify heroism and 
commitment day in and day out. Their bravery, resilience, and 
selflessness in the face of danger have not only protected countless 
lives but have also inspired the entire community.
  I wish the Mount Arlington Fire Department a happy 100th anniversary. 
I thank them for their sacrifices, dedication, and overall, keeping our 
communities safe.
today we honor the career of Ms. Joyce 
Hamlett, our beloved Assistant to the Sergeant at Arms and our ``Keeper 
of the Mace.
  After nearly 5 decades of public service in the House of 
Representatives and at the U.S. Capitol, Ms. Hamlett will enjoy her 
well-deserved retirement as we thank her for all shes done. In the 
1980s, Ms. Hamlett started on Capitol Hill alongside her mother in the 
Capitol Cafe, working first as a sandwich maker and then as a grill 
cook. Within 5 years she was promoted to hostess and handled the cash 
register for thousands of visitors and hundreds of Members each week.
  She later became an elevator operator at the Capitol before becoming 
a security guard in the House Chamber in 1994. In 2007, she was elected 
to serve in her current role as Assistant to the Sergeant at Arms and 
has served dutifully for the last 16 years.
  We all love her for her strict adherence to House Rules and decorum 
on the House Floor but know shes just as sweet once you get to know 
her and hear all her amazing stories from her career on the Hill.
  On behalf of my colleagues and Floridas Third Congressional 
District, we wish Ms. Hamlett all the best in her retirement and hope 
she returns to visit us and this amazing place shes served with honor 
and integrity during her long career.
  I congratulate Ms. Joyce Hamlett, and thank her for all she has done 
to contribute to the history of this institution. We are forever 
grateful and hope she enjoys her well-deserved retirement.
I rise today to congratulate Joyce Hamlett 
on her retirement from the House Office of Chamber Security and honor 
her many years of faithful service to the U.S. House of Representatives 
and the American people.
  A native of Broadway, North Carolina, Joyce was raised in a home 
where faith and integrity were cherished above all else. These virtues 
remain the guiding principles of her life and helped to define her time 
here on Capitol Hill.
  Joyce left North Carolina for Washington in the early 1980s to begin 
a job as a sandwich maker at the Capitol Cafe. She quickly rose through 
the ranks and eventually took a position with chamber security. She is 
known for her hard work ethic and stark reputation as a no-nonsense 
enforcer of the Houses many rules and traditions. She has no issue 
being tough on journalists, visitors, and members alike when they step 
out of line. Yet, she also possesses a deep affection for lawmakers on 
both sides of the aisle, many of whom she views as family. All this 
eventually led to her appointment as Assistant Sergeant at Arms, where 
she serves in the important role as Keeper of the Mace of the House of 
Representatives.
  Joyces impact on the history and character of this chamber is 
without question. I was elated to hear that, upon her retirement, she 
will be moving to Sanford, North Carolina, a town in the heart of my 
district. I look forward to serving as her representative and cant 
wait to welcome her into our community.
, please join me today in congratulating Joyce Hamlett on 
her retirement and to thank her for her decades of dedicated service to 
this chamber.
it is my honor to recognize and congratulate 
Judge Robert L. Miller, Jr. upon his retirement from the United States 
District Court for the Northern District of Indiana.
  Born and raised in South Bend, Indiana, Judge Miller has served the 
Hoosier state and our Nation with distinction for more than 4 decades. 
Nominated to the federal bench by President Ronald Reagan, Judge Miller 
is now retiring as a Senior Judge as well as a Judge of the United 
States Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court of Review, a position he 
was appointed to by U.S. Supreme Court Chief Justice John Roberts in 
2020.
  Some of the awards and accolades Judge Miller has been recognized 
with over the course of his career are the Sagamore of the Wabash 
Award, the American Inns of Court Professionalism Award for the Seventh 
Circuit, and an induction into the South Bend Alumni Hall of Fame.
  As John Adams famously observed, our constitutional republic is 
supposed function as a ``government of laws, not of men. Our Nation 
depends on dedicated public servants who faithfully uphold the rule of 
law and ensure that Lady Justice remains blind. Judge Miller is 1 such 
person and jurist.
  As he prepares to retire and write the next chapter of his life, I am 
proud to congratulate Judge Miller on a distinguished career and a job 
well done. I join Hoosiers throughout the Second District and beyond in 
expressing our gratitude to Judge Miller for his service and in wishing 
him and his family nothing but the best going forward.
I rise to honor the service and 
accomplishments of Olivia Morales, my fellow who has fought to protect 
and improve our education system.
  A Florida native, Olivia came to my office ready to protect and 
nurture the minds of all from kindergarten to post-Grad. Within 
Olivias first few weeks in my office, her passion and intellect shined 
through. She immediately got to work developing ideas to help students 
in dual-enrollment programs, drafting legislation in various areas of 
education, and assisting in the introduction of the LOAN and American 
Teacher Acts.
  Her dedication has been powerful as we have fought for the minds of 
underserved and disadvantaged communities. Olivas commitment to 
educational equity led her to complete her undergraduate degree in 
Public Policy at Duke University and spend a year working as a College 
Adviser with the Duke College Advising Corps. After her service with 
the Corps, she began her doctoral studies in the University of 
Floridas Higher Education Administration and Policy program.
  Olivia has a promising future--she will continue to make a difference 
and leave her mark on education policy as she continues to fight for a 
better system.
  On behalf of Floridas 24th Congressional District, I ask my 
colleagues to join me in honoring Olivia Morales for her dedication to 
education and passion for a more equitable Nation.
I want to pay tribute to a long-time staff 
member and dear friend. Christopher Del Beccaro, who is leaving to 
embark on his next adventure. Although he will be greatly missed, I 
could not be happier for the chapter of life he is about to enter with 
his soon-to-be wife.
  Chris has been my right-hand man, serving as Chief of Staff for the 
last 4 years. He has earned the reputation of a kind, patient. and 
dependable chief. I could always rely upon him for intelligent, helpful 
advice when it came to policy and politics.
  Even more importantly, he has led my office with a sincere heart. My 
staff has often remarked on his compassion and genuine concern for 
their well-being. He brought a spirit of laughter and support in both 
good times and in difficult moments. Chris stays true to who he is and 
what he believes, and I know it will bring him much success throughout 
the remainder of his life.
  I thank Christopher Del Beccaro for a job well done. I am forever 
grateful for the friendship and support he has given to me, the staff, 
and the people of our congressional district. I wish him and his 
fiance, Evgeniya, all the best with their upcoming wedding in 
Montenegro and the adventures that lie ahead.
  His presence in my office will certainly be missed, but Chris will 
undoubtedly continue to be a trusted advisor to me. Once a member of 
Team McCaul, always a member of Team McCaul.
on Tuesday, July 18, 2023, I was unable to 
vote on Roll Call No. 338. Had I been present, I would have voted YEA 
on Roll Call No. 338.
I rise today in recognition of Brent 
Robinson and his service to Virginias First District and the Nation.
  Brent got his start on the Hill in 2002 working for my predecessor, 
Jo Ann Davis. Brent joined my office in 2007 as a Legislative 
Assistant, and subsequently worked his way up to Legislative Director 
and Deputy Chief of Staff. Brent served as my chief policy advisor 
during his time in my office and helped introduce key pieces of 
legislation. Over 20 years after getting his start on the Hill, Brent 
has become an expert on various policy issues and an integral member of 
my D.C. staff. From meeting with constituents to managing our 
legislative team, Brent has spent countless hours serving Virginias 
1st District.
  Brent has been an excellent mentor; always willing to offer advice to 
interns and staff. Both current and former members of my staff are 
improved public servants due to Brents leadership. Brents wisdom, 
humor, and perspective will be dearly missed in my office. I wish Brent 
the best as he starts his new position with FGS Global.
, I ask you to join me in recognizing the service and 
accomplishments of Brent Robinson. May God bless Brent as he embarks on 
a new challenge, and I look forward to seeing his continued success in 
the future.
I rise today to recognize an 
outstanding constituent from my district, Grace L. Morris. As we 
celebrate her life, we think of all the memories that she continues to 
share, as a citizen of our country. Grace was born in Pittston, 
Pennsylvania on September 11, 1923, grew up in upstate Pennsylvania and 
made her family home in Northeast Philadelphia on Lexington Avenue.
  Grace attended Saint Johns High School and graduated in 1941. She 
enrolled in Germantown Nursing School, graduated, and went to work as 
the head nurse for the psychiatric ward. Grace then joined the United 
States Army. She served on a POW ship that crossed the Atlantic Ocean 5 
times--over and back. Grace earned the rank of 2nd Lieutenant before 
World War II ended.
  Grace attended classes at the University of Scranton for further 
nursing studies.
  Her marriage to Bill Morris took place September 6, 1946. While 
raising 5 children, Grace worked as a Private Duty Nurse at Nazareth 
Hospital and later as a nursing instructor at the Philadelphia Training 
Institute.
  Grace was a devoted wife, remains an amazing mother and grandmother. 
Her great-grandchildren now number 10. She served as the neighborhood 
nurse and devoted much time to volunteer efforts through Saint Jeromes 
Parish, and Winchester Swim Club in Philadelphia.
  As we celebrate her 100 years of life, we are incredibly grateful for 
the positive impact she has made on all who know her.
Title IV of Senate Resolution 4, agreed to by the Senate of February 
4, 1977, calls for establishment of a system for a computerized 
schedule of all meetings and hearings of Senate committees, 
subcommittees, joint committees, and committees of conference. This 
title requires all such committees to notify the Office of the Senate 
Daily Digest--designated by the Rules Committee--of the time, place and 
purpose of the meetings, when scheduled and any cancellations or 
changes in the meetings as they occur.
  As an additional procedure along with the computerization of this 
information, the Office of the Senate Daily Digest will prepare this 
information for printing in the Extensions of Remarks section of the 
Congressional Record on Monday and Wednesday of each week.
  Meetings scheduled for Thursday, July 27, 2023 may be found in the 
Daily Digest of todays Record.
I rise today as we pay special tribute to 
the contributions and sacrifices made by our Nations women during 
Womens History Month. It is an honor to pay homage to outstanding 
women who are making a difference in my Congressional District. I would 
like to recognize a remarkable woman,

Carolyn Ramsay of the Hancock Park neighborhood of Los Angeles, 
California.
  Born in Philadelphia, Carolyn is the youngest of 5 children of Jean 
and Jack Ramsay. She attended the University of Oregon and received a 
bachelors degree in sociology in 1981. Carolyn worked as a journalist 
from 1986 to 2006 including as a magazine writer for Los Angeles Times 
Magazine, Buzz Magazine, and SELF magazine, correspondent for People 
Magazine, and staff writer at the Stamford Advocate.
  Following her career as a journalist, Ms. Ramsay served as the 
communications director and deputy chief of staff for the late Los 
Angeles City Councilman Tom LaBonge from 2006 to 2011, thereafter 
serving as the Los Angeles Program Director for the Trust for Public 
Land from 2011 to 2012, before returning to work for Councilman LaBonge 
as Chief of Staff from 2012 to 2014. In 2018, Carolyn went on to serve 
as the Executive Director for the Los Angeles Parks Foundation. Under 
her leadership, many parks in Los Angeles were improved and expanded 
for people to enjoy in the years ahead. After 5 years with the 
organization, Carolyn recently retired from her position.
  In addition to her illustrious career, Ms. Ramsay has always found 
the time to volunteer and give back to the community. She served on the 
board of trustees of Temple Israel of Hollywood, board of advisors of 
Hollywood Wilshire YMCA, and as board president of the Windsor Square 
Association from 2002 to 2005, where she led the organization during 
the planting of hundreds of street trees and was instrumental in the 
efforts for the historic preservation of Windsor Square.
  She has received several awards including Windsor Square Hancock Park 
Historical Societys Leadership Award, Wilshire Community Police 
Councils Lifetime Achievement Award, and in 2023 was named Nonprofit 
Executive of the Year for a medium sized organization by the Los 
Angeles Business Journal.
  Carolyn is married to her husband, Andy Goodman, who is a public 
interest consultant. Their son, Daniel Goodman, is a podcast producer 
for iHeartRadio in Los Angeles, and their daughter, Olivia Goodman, is 
about to begin her third year of medical school at the Kaiser 
Permanente Bernard J. Tyson School of Medicine in Pasadena.
  I ask all Members to join me in honoring this exceptional, well-
respected woman of Californias 30th Congressional District, Carolyn 
Ramsay.
I rise today as we pay special tribute to 
the contributions and sacrifices made by our Nations women during 
Womens History Month. It is an honor to pay homage to outstanding 
women who are making a difference in my Congressional District. I would 
like to recognize a remarkable woman, Dr. Marie Levine of Pasadena, 
California.
  Marie arrived in Pasadena in 1982 from France to attend the 
California Institute of Technology (Caltech), where she received a 
masters degree and a Ph.D. degree in engineering. Upon graduation, she 
joined the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) Jet 
Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), where she is still working to this day.
  As a Principal Engineer, Maries work has focused on formulating and 
developing extreme precision space observatories for NASA Astrophysics 
science missions. On her latest project, the James Webb Space Telescope 
(JWST), she guided the integrated modeling and simulations required to 
predict the observatorys performance in space. Because of its 
complexity, JWST could not be fully tested on the ground prior to 
launch, and verification of the on-orbit imaging quality and stability 
had to be done primarily by computer simulations. This task was 
especially daunting because there were no flight precedents to build 
upon and new modeling techniques had to be developed for predicting 
motion stability to the accuracy of one thousandth the diameter of a 
human hair across the 6-meter telescope. The job also involved 
coordinating the work of hundreds of engineers from across the country, 
including from universities, NASA center, and aerospace contractors. 
The amazing images produced by the telescope are a testament to the 
many who contributed and Maries outstanding leadership. This telescope 
will enable new scientific discoveries by looking back in time for how 
solar systems and galaxies formed after the Big Bang, and by detecting 
signs of life in the chemical composition of planets around other 
stars.
  Integrated modeling is now being successfully implemented on NASAs 
next astrophysics observatory, the Nancy Grace Roman Space Telescope, 
and Dr. Levine is on NASAs Standing Review Board as the integrated 
modeling specialist. With other experts around the country, she is 
currently working on early formulation plans for a large space 
telescope mission to find and characterize Earth-like planets. For her 
remarkable achievements in her field, Marie has received many awards 
during her 32-year career at JPL, including the JPL Magellan Award and 
the NASA Exceptional Service Medal.
  Active in her community and with a love of gardening, she volunteered 
with the Pasadena Water and Power Department to create a drought 
tolerant demonstration garden at the Sheldon Reservoir, which was 
recently acknowledged by the State of California Secretary of Natural 
Resources.
  I ask all Members to join me in honoring this exceptional, well-
respected woman of Californias 30th Congressional District, Dr. Marie 
Levine.
I rise today as we pay special tribute to 
the contributions and sacrifices made by our Nations women during 
Womens History Month. It is an honor to pay homage to outstanding 
women who are making a difference in my Congressional District. I would 
like to recognize a remarkable woman. Evelyn Serrano of the Sunland-
Tujunga neighborhood of Los Angeles, California.
  Evelyn is a Cuban immigrant, artist, educator and community volunteer 
working at the intersection of creative activism, placemaking, land 
stewardship, memory, and community engagement, and her employment and 
volunteer activities are indeed a reflection of her collaborative, 
artistic nature. She received her Bachelor of Fine Arts from the 
Maryland Institute College of Art, Master of Fine Arts in Studio Art 
and Integrated Media from the California Institute of the Arts 
(CalArts), a Masters in Education from Alliant International 
University, and her teaching credential from the University of 
California, San Diego.
a co-founder of Sunland Tujunga Forward (ST Forward), 
a non-profit organization that focuses on equity, anti-racism, 
intersectional feminism, land stewardship, and transformative 
relationships through collaborative action. ST Forward organizes an 
annual Indigenous Peoples Day, monthly land restoration events at Big 
Tujunga Canyon, an annual Pride Festival, and native plantings and 
curriculum at local schools.
  She served as Co-Artistic Director of Nuestro Lugar: North Shore, an 
innovative large-scale resident-designed, culture-driven community 
development project in a rural community on the Salton Sea, and she co-
founded Nomad Lab, an award-winning non-profit arts organization that 
worked with Canyon Country and Newhall residents and city officials to 
develop art-centered initiatives and inclusive spaces for learning, 
community organizing, and grassroots change through the arts. Ms. 
Serrano is the co-founder of I.D.E.A. Wave Co-lab, a project that 
creates open-source tools for coalitions, organizations, schools, and 
communities to support their journeys of transformative justice 
healing. She has worked in partnerships with visual and performing 
artists, policy makers, writers, educators and students, community 
organizers, non-profit organizations, and diverse communities 
nationally and internationally, and her curatorial projects have been 
featured in Los Angeles, Miami, Baltimore, and in Mexico, Uruguay, and 
Israel.
  Evelyn has taught courses on activism, the arts and community 
engagement at CalArts and has led workshops and lectured in Miami, 
Dallas, Los Angeles and Baja, California. She is the lead artist of El 
Acercamiento/The Approach, a transnational art project with U.S. and 
Cuban artists and, is an Arts for Advocacy Fellow and the Director of 
Arts Integration and Visual Arts Specialist at the California Creative 
Learning Academy. In addition, Evelyn is training to become a seed 
keeper with a Mohawk leader, working to develop nature spaces and 
curriculum for growing and rehydrating our connection to the Earth, 
seeds and all creation. Ms. Serrano has been recognized and supported 
by the National Endowment for the Arts, the Los Angeles County 
Commission on Human Relations, and the Los Angeles County Department of 
Arts.
  I ask all Members to join me in honoring this exceptional, well-
respected woman of Californias 30th Congressional District, Evelyn 
Serrano.