I include in the Record the following 
newsletter to give an update to my constituents to bring awareness to 
the Equal Representation Act in addition to issues surrounding the 
border crisis, antisemitism and energy costs.
       Dear Friend,
       This week, I was successful in passing my fourth bill since 
     serving in Congress, the Equal Representation Act.
       Our democracy depends on electoral integrity, and that 
     includes fair and equal representation of American citizens.
       By requiring a citizenship question on the decennial 
     census, the Equal Representation Act would make sure that 
     only U.S. citizens--those who have the right to vote--are 
     counted when apportioning the number of congressional seats 
     and Electoral College votes that each state has.
       Including non-citizens in the count when divvying up the 
     number of congressional seats for each state weakens 
     Americans representation. In fact, the Center for 
     Immigration Studies found that California has more 
     congressional seats than the population would otherwise 
     allow, and New York has

     four more, giving these states a greater influence in 
     determining the direction of our country.
       We need guardrails to protect our democracy, and that 
     includes making sure that American citizens--and American 
     citizens only--are accurately represented in their federal 
     government.
       Its time to stop diluting the voice and votes of Americans 
     and with the passage of my bill, its clear that many of my 
     colleagues agree.

       A major reason we need to stop illegal immigrants from 
     skewing representation numbers in our government is due to 
     this administrations disastrous open-border policies that 
     have allowed more than 7.2 million illegal immigrants to 
     enter our country through our southern border. That is more 
     than the population of 36 states.
       President Biden inherited policies from President Trump 
     that would have strengthened our border security. However, 
     since Bidens first day in office, he has reversed policies 
     that were in place to stem the flow of illegal immigrants, 
     and has undermined U.S. border security on more than 60 
     occasions.
       The House sent a strong message by passing H. Res. 1112, 
     which condemns this administrations policies that have 
     created this costly border crisis. We also urged the 
     administration to take immediate action to end this national 
     security threat, and we will not rest until law and order is 
     restored at our borders.

   The presidents clandestine flights of more than 400,000 illegal 
                               immigrants

       The House Homeland Security Committee recently released 
     documents that identified more than 45 airport locations to 
     which the president secretly flew more than 400,000 illegal 
     immigrants.
       These documents are another example of how this 
     administration is jeopardizing the safety of Americans and 
     our national security, and why the House needed to pass the 
     strongest border security bill in history, the Secure the 
     Border Act, which would strengthen our borders by restoring 
     President Trumps border policies.

       Youve probably seen footage of antisemitic mobs who have 
     been defending the actions of Hamas, harassing Jewish 
     students and disrupting learning across college campuses in 
     America.
       The House has launched a probe to crack down on campus 
     antisemitism, and we will not stop until Jewish students feel 
     safe on their campuses, and until universities that fail to 
     do their part are held accountable.
       Colleges and universities need leadership with a moral 
     backbone to stand up against antisemitism and provide a safe 
     learning environment for Jewish students. Any administrators 
     who refuse to hold these protestors accountable are not fit 
     to lead and should resign.

       During a House Budget Committee hearing, members examined 
     the financial consequences of the administrations border 
     crisis and had an opportunity to inform the American people 
     of the true cost of open border policies.
       The White Houses open border policies have resulted in a 
     surge of illegal immigrant encounters and influx of deadly 
     drugs across our southwestern border.
       This is being paid for by the American taxpayer at the 
     federal, state and local levels.
       The Federation for American Immigration Reform (FAIR) 
     calculated that illegal immigration for 2023 alone cost 
     taxpayers $150.7 billion. Taxpayers are shouldering $8,776 
     per illegal immigrant per year for nearly 22 million illegal 
     immigrants to cover costs including for housing, feeding, 
     clothing, jailing, adjudication, education and shelter.
       To protect American lives and improve the federal 
     governments stewardship of taxpayer dollars, securing our 
     southwestern border requires a collaborative partnership 
     among all levels of government, including federal, state and 
     local.
       As a member of the House Budget Committee, Ill continue to 
     look for avenues to enforce the law of the land and implement 
     a cost-effective, comprehensive border security strategy that 
     secures our border, ends illegal immigration and protects our 
     citizens.

   A ports significance in the health of U.S. supply chain, economy

       Imagine this: You go to the grocery store and theres no 
     fruit. Or maybe youre building a house and theres a steel 
     and lumber shortage. Why? Because North Carolinas largest 
     port, the Port of Wilmington, has been cut off due to a 
     collapse of the Cape Fear Memorial Bridge,
       This collapse would immediately restrict access to the 
     port, which contributes $12.9 billion to North Carolinas 
     economy every year, directly and indirectly supports more 
     than 87,700 jobs across the Old North State, and would cost 
     the economy tens of millions of dollars each day the port is 
     closed.
       Thats what the Port of Baltimore and the citizens of 
     Maryland are experiencing due to the collapse of the Francis 
     Scott Key Bridge over the lower Patapsco River.
       I recently visited the Port of Baltimore and the wreckage 
     site of the Francis Scott Key Bridge as a member of the House 
     Appropriations Committee. Our mission was to better 
     understand the collapse, its impact on the economy, and what 
     will be needed to rebuild the bridge.
       The Port of Baltimore is the nations farthest-inland port, 
     and the top domestic port for cars, forest products, farm 
     equipment and sugar. The port generates $4.7 billion in 
     economic value to the state of Maryland and supports nearly 
     22,000 jobs,
       Estimates predict the Baltimore ports closure costs 
     Americas economy $15 million each day it is closed and has 
     added hours to transportation times for vital goods and 
     services that Americans rely on every day in the mid-Atlantic 
     region and beyond.
       Ships are having to travel greater distances to offload 
     shipments, and an estimated 5,000 trucks per day are being 
     diverted across the region, adding hours to their travel time 
     and significantly affecting the flow of goods across most of 
     the United States.
       Marylands transportation secretary estimates that the cost 
     to rebuild this critical pillar of our nations supply chain 
     is nearly S1.9 billion.
       At some point, when Maryland comes to the federal 
     government for our assistance in funding this rebuild, I want 
     you to know that I will be supporting that effort for the 
     sake of our nations supply chain and for the health of our 
     national economy, just as I would hope my colleagues in 
     Maryland would do if such a tragedy were to ever happen at a 
     North Carolina port.

       If the White House is going to require new product 
     standards for energy conservation, the requirements should be 
     feasible and reasonable.
       I cast NC-11s vote for the Hands Off Our Home Appliances 
     Act to modify the Department of Energys (DOE) procedures for 
     mandating energy-efficiency standards by prohibiting the DOE 
     secretary from requiring standards that are not 
     technologically feasible and economically justified.
       Western North Carolinians are already burdened by rising 
     costs, and the last thing we need is more unrealistic federal 
     regulations that further raise prices, fail to provide 
     meaningful energy savings and take away consumer choice.

       The Gold Star Family Fellowship Program is organized by the 
     Chief Administrative Officer (CAO) of the House of 
     Representatives and is an opportunity for Gold Star family 
     members to apply for a one-year fellowship with members of 
     Congress. This includes any family member (parents, children 
     including stepchildren, spouses or siblings) of military 
     members who have died in the line of duty.
       If you are interested in applying for this fellowship, 
     visit the CAO website here.
       With my warmest regards,
       Chuck Edwards
       Member of Congress
I rise today to honor 
Annette Wolf for her milestone 100th birthday celebrated on April 1, 
2024. Annette has been a resident of Boynton Beach, Florida since 1999 
and is a proud wife and mother to two great men. What a wonderful 
occasion for Annette, her family, and friends as she reminisces and 
celebrates a life great in years and rich in accomplishments.
  Annette and her husband ran a corrugated box factory business in 
Upstate New York for several years. She started the Womens Business 
and Professional Organization in 1954 in Glens Falls, NY. Annette loves 
to socialize with her friends by playing Mah-Jongg and Canasta. She 
believes in doing everything in moderation and is an avid reader and 
regular viewer of MSNBC and CNN.
  She has lived through extraordinary times in history and has no doubt 
witnessed remarkable changes unimaginable at the time of her birth in 
1924. May this be a joyous time as her family and friends gather to 
celebrate this amazing milestone.
  Annette always has a smile on her face and remains positive in all 
things. Mr. Speaker, it is an honor to congratulate Ms. Annette Wolf on 
her 100th birthday and I wish her good health and great happiness.
I was unable to be physically present for 
all votes on May 8th. Had I been present, I would have voted: YEA on 
Roll Call No. 194, and YEA on Roll Call No. 195.
I rise today to recognize and honor the 
unique contributions that have been made to our community by one of my 
constituents, Bryan Fisher. Three years ago, his mother was diagnosed 
with colon cancer and started a non-profit charity with her 
gastroenterologist and surgeon. Their goal was helping other colon 
cancer patients. Bryan, who was a Pre-Med student at the University of 
South Florida in Tampa at the time, volunteered countless hours to help 
the organization get off the ground. He maintains the non-profit 
organizations website, updating it regularly with helpful resources 
for patients and healthcare providers. The Foundation provides 
pamphlets to endoscopy centers that

perform colonoscopies. If a mass is found, the center gives the patient 
the pamphlet so patients dont have to go through their cancer journey 
alone. The foundation also provides the public with pamphlets about 
colon cancer screening and pamphlets for current colon cancer patients. 
All of the pamphlets have been designed by Bryan. Bryan has also been 
instrumental in fundraising efforts to ensure the non-profit foundation 
has the resources it needs to operate. Bryan even formed the ``Green 
and Gold Committee at USF where he and his fellow Pre-Med students 
met regularly to discuss ways to help the Foundation prosper. They held 
a ``game night at USF to educate college kids about colon cancer and 
offered screening information for them to share with their family 
members. They raised a little money and dispensed a lot of information. 
Bryan is about to start his journey in medical school this summer and 
plans to practice medicine in Citrus County one day.
  It is clear that Mr. Fisher has made a profoundly positive impact on 
our community, and I am grateful for his service.
I rise today to recognize and honor the 
unique contributions made to our community by one of my constituents, 
Catherine Scheland, has exemplified outstanding dedication and 
selflessness as a volunteer with a local non-profit, One Community Now. 
Cathy plays a pivotal role in the organizations Veterans program, 
serving as a team leader for Operation Stand Down. Her commitment is 
truly commendable, dedicating over 180 hours each year to the events 
setup, overseeing the Chaplains area, and co-directing the 
transportation area. Beyond the event, Cathy personally delivers 
bicycles to veterans in need throughout the year, using her own 
resources to provide locks and lights. She serves as a mentor, offering 
support and using her own funds to assist homeless veterans with 
housing. In the organizations Pack A Sack initiative to fight 
childhood hunger, Cathy is also actively involved, ensuring children 
have food every weekend of the year. She not only contributes her time 
but also financially supports the program. Cathys engagement extends 
to the agencys annual Pack the Park fundraiser, where she plays a 
vital role in securing sponsors, donations, and volunteers. Cathys 
dedication isnt confined to our One Community Now; she volunteers with 
other

non-profits and actively participates in her church. Her strong faith, 
character, and compassionate heart make her a hero in our community. 
Additionally, Cathys role as a prayer warrior and her unwavering 
support for those in need further showcase her exceptional qualities.
  It is clear that Ms. Scheland has made a profoundly positive impact 
on our community, and I am grateful for her service.
RECOGNIZING COEN BREHMERS FLORIDA HIGH SCHOOL WEIGHTLIFTING 
                               of florida
I rise today to celebrate Coen 
Brehmer, a Yulee High School Hornet who recently won the Florida High 
School weightlifting championships which is impressive at any age, but 
even more so as only a junior in high school.
  Coen qualified for both the Olympic and traditional in the 119-pound 
weight class. At the state championship, Coen stung the competition, 
winning first in the Olympic lift and finishing second in traditional. 
He pulled off a 160-pound snatch, a 205-pound clean-and-jerk, and a 
215-pound bench to bring home the gold. The victory was as sweet as 
honey and the crowd was buzzing at his magnificent displays of 
strength.
  The Hornets, under the leadership of Coach Kyle Dougherty, performed 
incredibly well across the board this season. Coens teammates, Zachary 
Kruger and Kevin Harris, also qualified for state after exceptional 
performances this season.
  Coen is a fantastic representation of Northeast Florida. He is a kind 
friend and a great teammate. His hard work paid off and he became Yulee 
High Schools first male state champion in any sport.
, on behalf of Floridas 4th Congressional District, I ask 
that my colleagues in Congress join me in congratulating Coen Brehmer 
on this remarkable achievement.
I rise today to recognize and honor the 
service and patriotism of one of my constituents, Ernest Scango. Mr. 
Scango was born on January 8, 1923 in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania. He was 
drafted into the United States Army on March 5, 1943. After training at 
Fort Benning, Ernest joined the 551st Paratroop Infantry Battalion. As 
a Parachutist and Rifleman, Ernest participated in the major battles 
taking place in France. He took part in Operation Dragoon which was 
designed to secure the southern coast of France and the critical 
Mediterranean ports while forcing the Germans to open a second front 
while facing the D-Day invasion in Normandy under Operation Overlord. 
Then, he subsequently redeployed and took part in the Ardennes 
Offensive and Rhineland campaigns which were critical to ending war in 
Europe.
  Today, Mr. Scango lives in Homosassa, Florida where he just 
celebrated his 102nd birthday. This month, he is receiving the 
distinguished insignia at ``Chevalier de la Legion dHonneur 
(``Knight in the Legion of Honor) from the French government. As a 
Member of the Greatest Generation, Mr. Scango and his fellow brothers 
and sisters-in-arms demonstrated incredible bravery and skill as they 
fought to save the world from the evils of Nazism, hatred and genocide. 
We all owe this hero a debt of gratitude that can never fully be 
repaid. Today and always, we remember his patriotism and courageous 
actions. We must honor his service and sacrifice by continuing to 
protect the sacred values of freedom he fought so hard to defend.
I rise today to recognize Humble House 
Cafe from Golden, Colorado for being honored as part of the Golden 
Rotary Ethics in Business Awards.
  Known for its positive atmosphere and work environment, Humble House 
has designed a business model which includes both community involvement 
and charity work. Humble House is involved with a variety of causes. 
They offer free coffee Tuesdays for teachers, first-responders, and 
non-profit workers, sell retail on behalf of passionate artisans in the 
local community and creators in developing countries, and allow 
customers to choose which of several nonprofits the charity proceeds 
from their purchase will go.
  Humble House has taken great care to create a business model that 
caters to the needs of the environment, encourages local community 
growth and engagement, and supports those in need around the world.
  On behalf of the people of Colorados Seventh Congressional District, 
it is my honor to thank the wonderful people of Humble House for their 
active involvement in our community.
I rise today to recognize Keith Sorci for 
earning the Man of the Year Award from the Arvada Chamber of Commerce.
  Keith has been serving his community for over 20 years in many 
capacities, including as president of the Arvada Gardeners, 
volunteering with the Arvada Historical Society and with local schools, 
and distributing food to those in need. Keith also works with Jefferson 
County Justice Services which offers alternatives to incarceration for 
Coloradans, training others to be equally helpful in their work for the 
community. His continued dedication to the Arvada Community showcases 
his spirit of service and this award acknowledges his hard work.
  On behalf of the people of Colorados Seventh Congressional District, 
it is my honor to congratulate Keith on achieving the 2023 Arvada 
Chamber of Commerce Man of the Year Award.
I rise today to recognize Mark McGoff of 
Arvada, Colorado for winning the Pioneer Award from the Arvada Chamber 
of Commerce.
  Mark has proudly served his community in Arvada for years as a member 
of the City Council, the Arvada Fire Board, and a volunteer for the 
Historical Society, Arvada Jefferson Kiwanis, and the Arvada Center. He 
is an Emeritus Board Member of the Ralston House and is currently 
working to plan Arvadas anniversary celebration this year.
  The Pioneer Award is granted when a previous winner of the Man or 
Woman of the Year Award continues to perform notable work for the 
people of Arvada. Mark has done exactly that with his continual 
contributions to the community and longstanding dedication to public 
service.
  On behalf of the people of Colorados Seventh Congressional District, 
it is my honor to congratulate Mark McGoff for winning the Pioneer 
Award. We thank him for his commitment to our community.
I rise today to recognize and honor the 
unique contributions made to our community by one of my constituents, 
Mike Orlito, who has made an indelible mark as an impactful and 
influential volunteer for the Community Food Bank. Mikes dedication, 
passion, and tireless efforts are inspirational. From the moment Mike 
stepped through the doors of this organization, his commitment to 
alleviating hunger and supporting those in need has been unwavering. 
His willingness to go above and beyond in every task he undertakes 
exemplifies the true spirit of volunteerism and advocacy. One of Mikes 
most notable contributions is his leadership and promotion of the 
Community Food Bank within the community. Whether its rallying local 
businesses, community groups, or donors, Mike has a remarkable ability 
to inspire others to join our fight against hunger. His strategic 
planning and effective communication skills have resulted in record-
breaking donations, tremendous organizational growth, and increased 
awareness of food insecurity issues in our area. Beyond his efforts in 
advocacy, Mike lends his talents to the organizations Fundraising 
Committee, ensuring each event is a success. Mike always has a smile on 
his face and a genuine warmth in his heart, believing that we are all 
better together. His positive attitude is infectious and genuine. The 
empathy Mike demonstrates emulates the welcoming and inclusive 
environment that the Community Food Bank values and bases its mission 
upon. Mike also actively engages with local policymakers, participates 
in community forums, and raises awareness about the importance of 
addressing food insecurity. Through his efforts, Mike has helped to 
grow the Community Food Bank from a $1.8 million operation to a $5.1 
million meal distribution hub for three counties in Florida.
  It is clear that Mr. Orlito has made a profoundly positive impact on 
our community, and I am grateful for his service.
it is my honor to recognize Volunteer 
Fairfax and express my sincere appreciation to recipients of the 2024 
Annual Fairfax County Volunteer Service Awards.
  Established 50 years ago, Volunteer Fairfax matches the skills and 
interests of thousands of volunteers with the needs of local non-profit 
organizations. The success of this model and its impact on delivery of 
needed services is beyond question; Volunteer Fairfax has been rated as 
one of the most effective community service organizations in the 
nation.
  Each year, Volunteer Fairfax selects a few exceptional individuals, 
groups, or organizations to receive special recognition. It is my great 
pleasure to include in the Record the following names of the 2024 
Fairfax County Volunteer Service Awards honorees:
  Anthony Amos--2024 Rising Star
  Jeffrey Katz--2024 Volunteer Manager
  Michael Mixon--2024 Volunteer of the Year
  Food for Neighbors--2024 Volunteer Program of the Year
  Able Moving &amp; Storage--2024 Outstanding Corporate Citizen of the Year
  Eileen Ellsworth--Lifetime Achievement Award
  Jeff Bentley--2024 Executive Leader of the Year
  Tom McCook--Braddock District Champion
  Angie Guevara--Dranesville Community Champion
  Hasan Shah--Franconia District Champion
  Dr. Eric Goplerud--Hunter Mill District Champion
  Nancy Hall--Mason District Champion
  Cathy Hosek--Mount Vernon District Champion
  Carrie Conley--Providence District Champion
  Isabella Solano--Springfield District Champion
  Patti Cooksey--Sully District Champion
  Robbie Mosley--Chairmans Champion
I ask that my colleagues join me in commending Volunteer 
Fairfax for its decades of outstanding community service. I 
congratulate the recipients of the 2024 Fairfax County Volunteer 
Service Awards and thank them and the thousands of other local 
volunteers for their incredible contributions to our community. Their 
selfless dedication is worthy of our highest praise and is one of the 
main reasons that our community is often ranked as one of the best 
places in the country to live, work, and raise a family.
I rise today to recognize the Educational 
Foundation of Dexter on the 40th anniversary of their founding. The 
support they have provided for Dexters students and educators over the 
last 40 years is worthy of commendation.
  The Educational Foundation of Dexter (EFD) was founded in 1984 to 
enhance the educational experience for those enrolled in the Dexter 
Community School District. Through teacher written grants, the EFD 
provides financial support for new and innovative educational projects. 
The EFD has awarded over $1 million since 1984 for programs such as 
FLEX Robotics Kits for Creekside Middle School, a field trip to the 
Charles H. Wright Museum for the entire 5th grade, adaptive music for 
students with special needs, and equipment to support the Iron Dread 
program at Dexter High School. In 2023, the EFDs Spring Auction raised 
over $24,000 for Dexter students.
  In 2015, Excellence 4 Dexter Students (E4DS) was formed in response 
to multiple years of annual budget cuts at the state level. This led to 
some notable changes within the district, including larger class sizes 
and reduced staffing. Since their founding, E4DS has donated over 
$182,000 to the Dexter Community Schools for additional programming. 
Their donations have supported additional math and science programming 
for grades 3-6, mental wellness programs for both staff and students, 
and an experience at Eastern Michigan University for many 6th grade 
classes. In 2020, E4DS and the Educational Foundation of Dexter joined 
forces to better support and respond to the needs of the Dexter 
Community School District.
, I ask my colleagues to join me today in celebrating the 
work of the Educational Foundation of Dexter over the last four 
decades. Both the teachers and students of the Dexter community have 
had a more fulfilling educational experience due to the hard work of 
the EFD. We are excited to see what they can accomplish over the next 
40 years. I thank the EFD.
TRIBUTE TO VIOLET SAGE WALKER--CALIFORNIAS 24TH CONGRESSIONAL WOMAN OF 
                             of california
each year, through the Women of the Year 
Award, my office extends special recognition to women on the Central 
Coast who have made a difference in our community. I would like to 
recognize one outstanding Women of the Year Award recipient, Violet 
Sage Walker of San Luis Obispo, California.
  Violet is the chairwoman of the Northern Chumash Tribal Council 
(NCTC), a non-profit offering a foundation for the Chumash people of 
San Luis Obispo County to continue practicing their heritage and 
culture with dignity and vibrancy. She assumed the position after the 
passing of her father, Native American Tribal Chief Fred Harvey 
Collins, on October 1, 2021, and continues to advance Chumash heritage 
and culture in partnership with a broad community of Tribal allies, 
conservation organizations, and others.
  As leader of the NCTC, Violets mission is to protect the sacred 
places for those who were here long ago, for those here now, and for 
those who are still coming. The Central Coast is home to many sacred 
locations that are mentioned in Chumash oral tradition which include 
stories (saga squatinasni) and context over the past 15,000 years, 
including an older recorded date at Point Conception, an extremely 
important Chumas Sacred Place known to Native Americans as the Western 
Gate (Humqaq).
  For Violet, one of those duties is serving as the nominator of the 
proposed Chumash Heritage National Marine Sanctuary, the first 
Indigenous-led sanctuary nomination and one that tribal elders and 
members of the local community in San Luis Obispo and Santa Barbara 
counties have advocated for decades. As proposed, this sanctuary 
bridges the physical gap of protection between the Monterey Bay and 
Channel Islands national marine sanctuaries. It will enhance the 
lifeforce (tishwin) of coastal ocean waters and shorelines by 
integrating and engaging the traditional knowledge of the indigenous 
People in partnership with scientists, environmental public interest 
groups, and diverse members of the concerned public.
  So far. the proposal has received an overwhelmingly positive 
response, and the plan is to provide formal designation by mid-2024.
  Violets continued leadership to the Chumash people and the San Luis 
Obispo/Santa Barbara County community is an inspiration to men and 
women throughout the district. Her ongoing efforts ensure that the 
heritage and legacy of the Chumash are respected and will endure for 
generations to come.
  I am honored to recognize Violet Sage Walker for her continued 
commitment to the Central Coast. I ask all Members to join me today in 
honoring an exceptional woman of Californias 24th Congressional 
District for her incredible work in the community.