I rise today to honor the impactful 
career of Culpeper Town Councilwoman Meaghan Taylor. Councilwoman 
Taylor has been a fixture of the Culpeper community throughout her 
years both as a resident and public servant of the community.

  On May 6, 2024, page E452, in the third column, the following 
appeared: Mr SPANBERGER. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to honor the 
impactful career of
  
  The online version has been corrected to read: Ms. SPANBERGER. 
, I rise today to honor the impactful career of

  First elected to the Culpeper Town Council in 2014, Councilwoman 
Taylor has served with purpose and compassion. Currently, Councilwoman 
Taylor serves her constituents through her active participation in 
various committees, including as a member of the Towns Personnel and 
Ordinance Committee, as the Council Representative to the Culpeper 
Renaissance, and as a member of the Towns Planning Commission. She 
also serves as a board member of Full Circle Thrift. Previously, she 
served as the Chairwoman of the towns Public Safety, Public Works, 
Planning &amp; Community Development Committee, as a member of the Town/
County Interaction Committee, and as Council Representative on the 
Rappahannock Rapidan Regional Commission.
  A pillar of excellence in the community, Councilwoman Taylor can 
always be found volunteering her time at Culpeper Renaissance, Inc. 
downtown events or going above and beyond to connect and deliver 
results for Culpeper. She brings joy and kindheartedness to every 
community event and has been a bright light felt by us all. She has 
been a dedicated advocate for all who live in Culpeper and is well 
deserving of the highest honor and recognition.
, please join me in celebrating the remarkable career of 
Culpeper Town Councilwoman Meaghan Taylor. She has built a legacy of 
service, and her contributions will continue to have a lasting impact 
on generations to come.
I rise today to honor a faithful public 
servant, Mayor John (Sammy) Phillips of Jacksonville, North Carolina. 
Recently, celebrating his 50th anniversary of service to the city, 
Mayor Phillips dedicated most of his adult life to helping the people 
of Jacksonville. Everyone who knows him can attest to his strong work 
ethic and selfless devotion to his community.
  In 1974, Mayor Phillips started his career as an officer with the 
Jacksonville Police Department and, after serving for over thirty 
years, retired as Deputy Chief of Police. Thanks to his leadership and 
dedication, the Jacksonville Police Department became a nationally 
accredited law enforcement agency in 1991. While Mayor Phillips served 
in the Police Department, he also worked to complete academic studies. 
He graduated from the Federal Bureau of Investigations National 
Academy, a premier law enforcement training program in Quantico, 
Virginia. Taking night classes, he earned a Bachelors degree in 
criminal justice from North Carolina Wesleyan College. Mayor Phillips 
also completed a Masters in Public Administration from East Carolina 
University. Mayor Phillipss sacrifices during his law enforcement 
career to further his profession and knowledge base are quite laudable.
  In 2004, when Mayor Phillips retired from the Police Department, he 
couldnt resist his love for his community and commitment to public 
service. After a few months of working around his house and playing 
golf, he filed for a seat on the City Council in 2004. After a stint on 
the City Council, he decided to run for Mayor and was elected in 
November 2007. Now going on 17 years, Mayor Phillips is the longest-
serving Mayor of Jacksonville since W. Bruce Teachey. During his tenure 
as Mayor, Mr. Phillips has been known for his attentiveness to the 
concerns of his Jacksonville constituents. In 2017, when renewed racial 
tensions arose, Mayor Phillips was determined to bring all residents of 
Jacksonville together. He helped to launch the ``One City, Our City, My 
City campaign to promote healing in his community. In 2014, Mayor 
Phillips received the Long Leaf Pine Award, an honor given to North 
Carolinians with an exemplary record of public service. Mayor Phillips 
has spearheaded much development in the city, including revitalizing 
the Jacksonville City Hall, building multiple fire stations, and 
constructing the Jacksonville Marina. A lifelong resident of 
Jacksonville, Mayor Phillips has demonstrated his love for the city and 
its inhabitants. I feel honored to extend this chambers recognition of 
this faithful public servant, and I look forward to the future success 
of Jacksonville with Mayor Phillips at the helm.
HONORING KEITH AND GINGER MYERS, FOR THEIR CONTRIBUTIONS TO LOUISIANAS 
                              of louisiana
I rise to honor the Myers 
family of Lafayette, this years University of Louisiana at Lafayette 
(ULL) Alumni Association Spring Gala honorees.
Ginger Myers have served as health care 
industry leaders for decades. In 1994, they co-founded LHC Group in 
order to address the health care needs of Lafayettes aging rural 
community. The Myers grew a freestanding single home health agency into 
a publicly traded company of almost 30,000 employees, now operating in 
38 states and the District of Columbia. LHC Groups success, along with 
its significant mission, must be attributed to the Myers own virtue.
  As LHC Groups first nurse, Mrs. Myers established the companys 
service-based culture. She has worked in a range of nursing and 
administrative roles in St. Landry Parish; served on LHC Groups board 
of directors; and helped to establish one of Louisianas first rural 
health clinics. She was chair of the Opelousas Womans Club board; a 
committee member for the St. Landry/Evangeline American Heart 
Association Heart Gala; and on the executive committee for Go Red for 
Women, an American Heart Association fundraiser.
  For his part, Mr. Myers served as LHC Groups chairman and chief 
executive officer from the companys inception, up to its merger with 
Optum. He is currently senior adviser for Optum and chairman and CEO 
emeritus for LHC Group. Mr. Myers is a co-founder, board member, and 
current chairman of the Partnership for Quality Home Healthcare in 
Washington, D.C. He is also a co-founder and former board member of the 
Alliance for Home Health Quality and Innovation. He has served as a CEO 
member of both the Healthcare Leadership Council and the American 
Hospital Association.
  Despite LHC Groups national expansion, the Myers have maintained 
their dedication to South Louisiana. LHC Groups headquarters are still 
firmly rooted in Lafayette. The Myers longstanding commitment to 
health care and community is exemplified by LHC Groups recent 
commitment of $20 million, over 10 years, to ULLs College of Nursing &amp; 
Health Sciences. This investment will bring endowments, scholarships, 
research initiatives and capital enhancements for nursing and health 
sciences.
  On behalf of Louisianas 3rd District, I commend Keith and Ginger 
Myers for their generous work, and I thank them for their devotion to 
South Louisiana.
I rise today to honor 
Suzanne Falzone, an esteemed member of our Yolo County community. Ms. 
Falzone is being honored at this years annual Yolo Farm to Fork board 
meeting for her pivotal role in shaping its success.
She has two children and three grandchildren. 
She is a lifelong educator, having been a teacher, school 
administrator, and educational consultant. She has continued this 
passion for education throughout her professional career.
  As one of its founders and now current President of the Board of Yolo 
Farm to Fork, Ms. Falzone has been instrumental in transforming Yolo 
County into a hub for agriculture and garden-based education. Her 
unwavering dedication and visionary leadership have not only fostered 
the growth of Yolo Farm to Fork but also left an indelible mark on the 
lives of thousands of children within our county.
  Some of Ms. Falzones major accomplishments with Yolo Farm to Fork 
include creating over 70 edible school garden programs, acquiring over 
24 thousand pounds of produce from 20 small local farms for use in 
school lunches. Ms. Falzone has helped over 3,000 students visit local 
farms on field trips and has funded 136 college internships. Through 
her advocacy, Yolo Farm to Fork has not only been able to reach over 
10,000 students, but also has provided them with the tools and 
knowledge to cultivate a lifelong relationship with healthy eating.
-to-fork community food system is inspiring. Her 
leadership, fundraising acumen, and passion for cultivating a healthier 
future has established Yolo Farm to Fork as a cornerstone of community-
driven agricultural education in Yolo County. Ms. Falzones knowledge 
of and proficiency in grant writing and fundraising have helped to 
ensure that Yolo Farm to Fork has remained financially independent.
-inspiring. 
Her tireless contributions on behalf of the organization and our 
broader community reflect her compassion and genuine desire to 
contribute positively to the people around her. Her devotion to 
bettering the lives of the children of Yolo County has left an 
indelible impact on our community.
, we thank Ms. Falzone for her dedicated service and 
philanthropic actions in our community and on behalf of Yolo Farm to 
Fork. Therefore, it is fitting and proper that we honor her here today.
I rise today to honor the exceptional 
career and dedicated service of Mr. Gregory R. Iannello. In addition to 
being an honored veteran, Mr. Iannellos tenure at Griffis Institute 
(GI) and his career with the Department of Defense stand as testaments 
to his unwavering commitment to safeguarding the United States.
  Greg obtained the esteemed position of Senior T2 Agreements Subject 
Matter Expert at the GI, focusing on Technology Transfer agreements for 
a decade. His expertise encompassed Education Partnership Agreements, 
Commercial Test Agreements, Cooperative Research and Development 
Agreements.
  During his 6 years with the Defense Contract Management Agency 
(DCMA), Greg served in multiple capacities including Quality Assurance 
Specialist, Contract Price Analyst, and Contract Administrator. The 
remainder of his career with the Department of Defense was dedicated to 
the Air Force Research Laboratory (AFRL/RI), where he served as a 
Contract Specialist, Procurement Analyst, Grants and Agreements 
Officer, Contracting Officer, and R&amp;D Contracting Branch Chief. During 
his time at AFRL/RI, Greg played a pivotal role in drafting Procurement 
Policy, Training, and Implementation. He spearheaded the utilization of 
Grants, Cooperative Agreements, Other Transactions, Technology 
Investment Agreements, and Consortium Agreements. Mr. Iannello 
dedicated 47 years to supporting the United States Air Force and the 
Department of Defense through both his direct employment, and his 
contributions at GI.
  In addition to his impressive career, Greg holds a Bachelor of 
Science in Business and Project Management from SUNY Polytechnic 
Institute. He also achieved an Acquisition Professional Development 
Program Level 3 Certification in Contracting under the Defense 
Acquisition Workforce Improvement Act. He was an active member of the 
National Contract Management Association (NCMA) and held several 
offices including Leatherstocking Chapter President, Certification 
Chair, and Fellows Chair. He also served 3 years on the National Board 
of Directors and is an NCMA Fellow and Certified Professional Contracts 
Manager.
  On behalf of New Yorks 21st Congressional District, I am deeply 
honored to acknowledge Gregory Iannellos extraordinary service, 
tireless efforts, profound commitment, and devotion to the United 
States.
I rise today to celebrate the life, 
leadership and service of

Reverend Cecil Williams: a spiritual giant who devoted his life to 
empowering those marginalized, forgotten and in need.
  Reverend Williams embodied the Gospel of Matthew: `for I was hungry 
and you gave me food, I was thirsty and you gave me drink. I was a 
stranger and you welcomed me. I was naked and you clothed me. I was 
sick and you cared for me. I was in prison and you visited me. Through 
his many good works, he transformed countless lives--in the Bay Area 
and beyond.
  Reverend Williams stood on the forefront of the American struggle for 
civil rights and social justice: whether fighting against racism, 
protesting the Vietnam War, confronting the crack cocaine epidemic or 
bringing compassion to those with HIV/AIDS, to name just a few of his 
many good works. In a moment when the LGBTQ+ community faced intense 
discrimination and stigma, Reverend Williams began presiding over the 
weddings of same-sex couples in San Francisco--nearly five decades 
before marriage equality became the law of the land.
  Alongside his beloved wife Janice Mirikitani, who was his partner not 
only in marriage but in service, Reverend Cecil Williams helped launch 
and lead the GLIDE Memorial Church for six decades. Strengthened by 
their belief in unconditional love and the power of redemption, GLIDE 
has built a community of compassion and inclusion in the heart of one 
San Franciscos toughest neighborhoods. Today, more than 11,000 San 
Franciscans of all races, ethnic backgrounds, cultures, social classes, 
ages, faiths and sexual orientations are a part of GLIDEs vibrant, 
diverse congregation.
  Living out Reverend Williams and Janices faith-based social justice 
mission, GLIDE is also one of the largest providers of social services 
in the city. GLIDE serves three nutritious meals a day, 365 days a 
year, to thousands of San Franciscans in need--while offering 
comprehensive support services, including affordable, accessible, 
quality health care, mental health services, and HIV/AIDS and substance 
abuse treatment. GLIDE also helps women overcome domestic violence and 
oppression by providing housing, child care and supportive services.
  Reverend Williams was not only respected but revered in our City as a 
clarion voice for love, respect and justice. At the same time, he 
embodied the spirit of our Citys patron saint, Saint Francis of 
Assisi, who taught us to `Preach the gospel. Sometimes use words. 
Indeed, he preached the gospel with his inspiring deeds each and every 
day.
  May it be a comfort to Reverend Williams children Kim and Albert, 
his stepdaughter Tianne, his grandchildren and all his loved ones that 
so many San Franciscans mourn their loss and pray for them during this 
sad time--and that his saintly teachings will live on in the hearts of 
all those who were blessed to know him.
I rise today to honor the exceptional life 
and the dedicated service of United States Navy veteran Thomas William 
Killian.
  Thomas was born on April 8, 1931, in Troy, New York where he was 
raised and attended school before enlisting in the U.S. Navy. Thomas 
enlisted in the Navy in 1951, serving for twenty years during the 
Korean and Vietnam Wars. During his time in the Navy, he was trained as 
a shipfitter and served aboard the USS Baltimore (CA-68), a heavy 
cruiser; the USS Lowe (DE-325), an Edsall-class destroyer escort; the 
USS Sierra (AD-18), a Dixie-class destroyer tender; and the USS Jason 
(AR-8), a Vulcan-class repair ship. Thomas remained in the Navy until 
September of 1971, when he retired at the rank of First Class (E-6). 
For his service, Thomas was awarded the Good Conduct Medal, the 
National Defense Service Medal, and the Vietnam Service Medal with two 
bronze stars.
  Thomas married his wife Patricia in October of 1952. Together, they 
shared 69 devoted years of marriage and had 4 children: Thomas, Beth, 
Colleen, and Patricia. After coming home from duty, Thomas returned to 
his wife and children in Troy. Utilizing the skills that he developed 
during his career with the Navy, he obtained a job as a fitter and 
welder at McKinney Steel Fabrications in Albany, New York where he 
worked for 22 years until his retirement in 1993.
  When Thomas was not working, he enjoyed spending time with his 
family. He had many hobbies including traveling, camping, surf fishing, 
and going on cruises. A beloved member of his community, he is 
remembered for his many professional and private accomplishments.
  On behalf of New Yorks 21st Congressional District, I am honored to 
recognize Thomas Killians extraordinary life of service, hard work, 
profound commitment, and devotion to the United States.
I rise today to honor the memory of Jose 
Lugo. Jose was a loving son, father, brother, uncle, cousin, and 
friend. He put others before himself, and he made people laugh 
endlessly. He loved music and having a good time with his family and 
friends, while always ensuring that his friends and family were taken 
care of. While Jose is no longer with us, his loved ones are left with 
so many beautiful memories of him. His favorite places to visit were 
Half Moon Bay, Pescadero, or any beach.
  He was selfless and truly had a heart of gold, and demonstrated this 
by choosing to donate his organs at the end of his life so that others 
would receive an opportunity to extend their lives. He was able to save 
five different lives by donating his earthly organs, and for that he is 
now a guardian angel and hero. He will forever be in his familys 
hearts, and with his loved ones wherever life takes them. We love him 
and he will be missed dearly. May he rest in peace.
I rise today to honor the 
Napa County Library Literacy Center as they celebrate 40 years of 
literary services.
  In 1984, the Napa County Library was one of twenty-seven programs 
that help pilot library literacy within California, the first of its 
kind in the United States. The Literacy Center has committed to helping 
adult learners improve their reading and writing skills in English. 
Over 40 years, the Napa County Library Literacy Center has helped more 
than 15,000 adult learners become literate, expanding their 
capabilities.
  With the assistance of volunteer tutors, adult learners can also 
improve their computer skills, receive guidance on financial planning, 
access translation resources, and gain skills needed to obtain their 
General Education Diploma (GED).
  The Napa County Library has collaborated with several organizations 
in Napa County, including Napa Valley College, Napa Valley Adult 
Education, and the Napa Valley Unified School District, to provide 
various resources. The goal is to broaden the opportunities for 
everyone in our community.
  In partnership with the California State Library and Smart Horizons, 
the Napa County Library also offers adults the opportunity to earn an 
accredited high school diploma and career certificate online through 
Career Online High School (COHS).
  With a dedicated group of volunteers and other literacy and library 
staff, the Napa County Library is proud to be a part of State Library 
Literacy Services. Together, they have provided assistance to over 
300,000 adult learners through more than 106 programs.
, the Napa County Library Literacy Center is deeply 
appreciated for their work on behalf of our community. It is, 
therefore. fitting and proper that we honor the Napa County Library.
on April 29, 2024, I was not recorded on Roll 
Call Vote No. 153 and No. 154.
  Had I been present, I would have voted ``AYE on both Roll Call No. 
153 and No. 154.
I rise today to recognize Dezire Miller 
for earning the Arvada Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth Award.
  Dezire has overcome many challenges along her journey to success, 
demonstrating perseverance at every step. Students who strive to make 
the most of their education, like Dezire, develop crucial skills and a 
work ethic that will guide them for the rest of their lives. This award 
is a testament to Dezires hard work, determination, and perseverance 
at Jefferson Jr./Sr. High School and is clearly just the beginning of a 
bright and promising future.
  It is my honor to congratulate Dezire Miller on achieving the Arvada 
Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth Award.
I rise today to recognize TeAira Nutter 
for earning the Arvada Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth Award.
  TeAira has overcome many challenges along her journey to success, 
demonstrating perseverance at every step. Students who strive to make 
the most of their education, like TeAira, develop crucial skills and a 
work ethic that will guide them for the rest of their lives. This award 
is a testament to TeAiras hard work, determination, and perseverance 
at Jefferson Jr./Sr. High School and is clearly just the beginning of a 
bright and promising future.
  It is my honor to congratulate TeAira Nutter on achieving the Arvada 
Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth Award.