I rise today to honor a 
remarkable unsung hero, Dr. Willie J. Reece, Jr.
  Dr. Willie J. Reece, Jr. is a native of Grenada, MS and the youngest 
of six children. His parents Willie Reece, Sr. and the late Sharon 
Seals Reece are his biggest inspirations.
  Dr. Reece enjoys singing and is actively involved as a member at 
Greater Faith MB Church under the leadership of Pastor Alvin D. Brown, 
Sr.
  Dr. Reece graduated from Grenada High School in 2010 and received his 
Bachelor of Art degree in psychology from the University of Southern 
Mississippi in 2014.
  Later, he obtained two masters degrees from Belhaven University--
Master of Art in Teaching (2016) and Master of Education in Curriculum 
and Instruction (2018).
  In 2019, Dr. Reece completed an educational leadership degree, and he 
completed the doctor of education program in educational leadership in 
2023.
  Dr. Reece has completed eight years of experience in education in the 
roles of teacher, lead teacher, MTSS coordinator, curriculum 
specialist, and principal.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in recognizing Dr. Willie 
J. Reece, Jr. for his dedication and tenacity to serving his community 
and desire to be a light that shines even in his dark times.
I rise today to honor a 
tenacious and self-motivated leader, Kelvin Reed. Kelvin Reed has shown 
what can be done through hard work, dedication, and a desire to 
achieve.
  Kelvin Reed was one of Warren Centrals top boys basketball players 
in the late 1980s. He led the Vikings in scoring as a sophomore, and 
steals and assists as a junior and senior, and was twice selected to 
The Vicksburg Posts All-County team. Reed averaged 15 points, 7 
assists and 3 steals per game over three varsity seasons.
  After high school, Reed moved on to Pensacola Junior College in 
Florida. He set the schools assists record and led the team to the 
1993 NJCAA Division I national championship.
  Reed was inducted into the 2022 Vicksburg Warren School District 
Athletic Hall of Fame.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in recognizing Kelvin 
Reed for his passion and dedication to the Vicksburg Warren School 
District.
I rise today to honor a 
tenacious and self-motivated leader, Pastor Larry Benford. He has shown 
what can be done through hard work, dedication, and a desire to 
achieve.
  Pastor Larry Benford surrendered his heart to God at a very young age 
and he has been declaring the good news of the Lord Jesus Christ since 
then. A native of Leland, Pastor Benford graduated from Leland High 
School and Mississippi Valley State University, where he received a 
bachelors degree in environmental health with a minor in Chemistry. He 
also has received training from The University of Illinois at Chicago 
as well as formal Biblical tutelage from Lifeway Christian and New 
Orleans Theological Seminary.
  Pastor Benford is an anointed leader. With pastoral services 
expanding over two decades, through the help of the Holy Spirit, he has 
served as Deacon, Sunday School Director, Assistant Pastor, and Pastor 
at Greater Springfield, Victory Temple and Mount Carmel Churches, 
respectively.
  As pastor of Living Word Fellowship Church since October 10, 1999, he 
has always taken the stance that the Word must be taught with passion 
and boldness--without compromise--in order that the lost will be saved, 
and the saved will be strengthened.
  Growing together in the Word of God, Pastor Larry and First Lady 
Wanda Benford are consummate students of the Word and outspoken 
believers in its ability to change lives for the better. Pastor Larry 
and First Lady Wanda Benfords greatest desire is that others would 
develop an intimate, personal relationship with the Lord.
  Pastor Larry and First Lady Wanda Benford have been married for 32 
years. To this union, they have been blessed with 3 daughters, Keyna, 
Leslie and Ariel and 3 grandchildren, LaKya, Kylar and Gervase.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in recognizing Larry 
Benford for his passion and dedication to serving the Lord, his 
members, and his community.
I rise today to recognize the service of 
Officer Urbano Rodriguez, Jr., a dedicated civil servant who is 
retiring from the Denton Police Department, having honorably served his 
community for over a decade.
  Prior to joining the Police Department, Urban, as he is fondly known, 
worked for over two years at the Denton Animal Shelter. During that 
time he bonded with one particular disabled dog, personally 
constructing a makeshift walking device that was equipped with wheels 
to a11ow the dog to walk freely. This act of compassion and needs-based 
service is symbolic of the character and calling that quickly led him 
to leave the shelter to become a Police recruit for the City in 2014.
  Upon completion of his training, Urban joined the front lines of the 
Denton Police Department as a part of the thin blue line protecting the 
public he had committed to serve. He knew from the outset that he 
belonged on the streets. Recognized as a ``go-getter with a strong 
work ethic, Urban quickly became a valued member of the Denton PD team. 
During his service he was involved in a number of notable traffic 
stops, including a large and unexpected confiscation of 
methamphetamine. Through the dedication and effort he and his shift 
partners brought to the streets, he helped disrupt a damaging delivery. 
protecting the community by preventing it from reaching its intended 
market.
  Urban was confronted with the full weight of his commitment when, on 
October 29, 2019, as a five-year veteran of the Denton Police 
Department, he was unexpectedly attacked and struck by multiple bullets 
from an assailants weapon during a routine traffic stop. It was at 
that moment that Urbans inner strength and character were defined. 
Unimaginably, he survived the trauma, beginning the long, difficult 
path to become the walking miracle he is today.
  When many felt it unlikely that he would even leave the hospital, 
Urbans strength and resolve led him through a challenging 
rehabilitation process to not only leave the hospital bed, but push 
beyond the damage of his injuries to regain his strength and mobility 
to once again walk freely. An outcome that seemed a fantasy to those 
who saw him during his initial recovery less than four years ago, is a 
testament to the enthusiasm and determined work ethic he was known for 
when he joined the department.
  In his service commitment to the community he swore to protect, and 
through the courage he has shown through his recovery, Urban embodies 
the very essence of Texas values. Each day he is continuing to build 
the example for those who will follow in his footsteps.
  On behalf of a grateful community, I want to thank Urban Rodriguez 
for his service and example. I truly wish him the very best in a well-
deserved retirement and for the continued contribution I know he will 
make in his new role and as an inspiration for his children and all who 
hear of his story.
I rise today, along with my colleague, 
Representative DeGette, to honor the life of an extraordinary 
Coloradan.
  John Fielder was a prolific nature photographer who lived in Summit 
County since 2006. Over 50 books have been published showing his 
photography.
  John also worked to protect Colorados ranches, public lands, and 
wildlife. Over his 40 year career, John was recognized on several 
occasions for his work. He received the 1993 Sierra Club Ansel Adams 
Award, the 2011 the Aldo Leopold Foundations first Achievement Award 
ever given to an individual, and an Honorary Degree in Sustainability 
Studies from Colorado Mountain College.
  We thank John for his work elevating the natural beauty of Colorado 
and for fighting to protect our pristine lands.
I rise to recognize the Vietnam and Korean 
War Veterans from Oregons Second Congressional District who, through 
the efforts of Honor Flight of Oregon, are visiting their memorials on 
the National Mall. When I meet these heroes, I am reminded of the 
enduring words of George S. Patton, Jr., who said, ``The highest 
obligation and privilege of citizenship is that of bearing arms for 
ones country. These words, Mr. Speaker, still ring true today. Those 
who value liberty are indebted to these heroes, for each one of them 
defended our freedom through acts of service, sacrifice, and bravery on 
behalf of our country. It is my privilege to include in the Record 
their names.
  The Veterans on this Honor Flight from Oregon are: Joshua Alvarez, 
Army; Dennis Anderson, Navy; Thomas Beckley, Army; Jerry Chartier, Sr, 
Marine Corps; Fredd Conn, Marine Corps; David Cunningham, Navy; William 
Duncan, Army; Richard Gehrke, Navy/Marine Corps; Edward Goodman, Navy; 
Roger Haynes, Air Force/Army; Robert Howerton, Navy; Michael Hoffman, 
Navy; David Johnson, Army; Earl Kilpatrick, Air Force; Jesse Redding, 
Navy; Paul Lofland, Army; Robert Long, Marine Corps; Jesus Lopez, Air 
Force; Preton Manville II, Marine Corps; William Mathews, Army/Air 
Force; Lawrence Mixon, Jr, Army; Charles Owen, Army; Robert Rammin, 
Army; Steven Rolston, Army; Loyd Thurman, Army; Jerry White, Army; and 
Otto William, Air Force. These heroes join over 260,000 Veterans, who 
since 2005, have been honored through the nationwide Honor Flight 
Network of volunteers. I would also like to recognize the volunteers 
and guardians traveling on this trip: Janet Wilkerson, and the 
guardians who have also served our country: Kathrine Berg, Army; Jody 
William, III, Marine Corps.
, in his 1983 Memorial Day address, Ronald Reagan said, 
``We are forever indebted to those who have given their lives that we 
might be free. As a Nation, we must never take for granted the 
liberties we enjoy today, recognizing that these freedoms have been 
hard-won by the honor, commitment, and sacrifice of our Veterans. Each 
Member in this chamber and citizen in these United States should be 
humbled by the courage of the brave Veterans who voluntarily underwent 
the dangers necessary to preserve our country. Colleagues, please join 
me in thanking these Veterans and the volunteers of Honor Flight of 
Oregon for their remarkable service and devotion to our great country.
on September 2, 2023, Jack Delbert Stewart 
II, died peacefully at his home in Denton, Texas at the age of 88. He 
was born on July 6, 1935, in Ennis, Texas, to the late Jack Delbert and 
Dora Ellen (Johnson) Stewart. He graduated from Ennis High School in 
1953 and Abilene Christian College in 1957. During his summer breaks, 
he and some friends worked for the U.S. Forest Service backing up the 
Hot Shot teams fighting wildfires out of Coeur DAlene, Idaho.
  In 1958, a roommate set Jack up on a blind date with Jean Pogue. They 
went to the King and I at the State Fair. After a two-year courtship, 
they were married on January 23, 1960.
  Jack served for six years in the 49th Armored Division of the Texas 
National Guard, which was mobilized in April of 1961 during the Cuban 
Missile Crisis. They spent one year stationed at Fort Polk in 
Leesville, Louisiana.
  Jack and Jean returned to Dallas where he worked for Industrial 
Indemnity Insurance until he was transferred to Beaumont. In 1970, they 
moved to San Antonio to work with SP Personnel Associates. He was a 
member of the MacArthur Park Church of Christ where he was active in 
church leadership, serving as both a Deacon and an Elder. He also 
served on the founding board of Christian Heritage Schools.
  In 1992, they moved to Abilene for Jack to be the director of the 
Career Center at Abilene Christian University. There he helped students 
prepare for life after college, including helping to counsel them on 
career next steps as well as resume writing, interviewing skills, 
choosing the right majors, and setting up job fairs and job interviews. 
Of all the careers he had, this was his favorite because he loved 
working with the students and helping to put them on a path to success. 
He was an active member of Hillcrest Church of Christ and served as an 
Elder.
  Jack always had a servants heart, and he volunteered frequently at 
the food pantry in Abilene. A committed family man who always wanted 
everyone to be together, Jack and Jean fulfilled a dream of buying a 
cabin in Angel Fire, New Mexico where they shared

many wonderful memories with their friends and family. He was also a 
lifelong Dallas Cowboys and San Antonio Spurs fan. He rarely missed a 
game and loved to talk sports, including the latest on his ACU 
Wildcats. In April of 2021, Jack and Jean moved to Denton to be closer 
to family and UT Southwestern.
  He is survived by his wife Jean of 63 years and their children, Jeff, 
Jay, and Jill. Jack was blessed with seven grandchildren who knew him 
as Papa, including Joshua Stewart, Jackson Stewart, Meghan Tapia, 
Morgan OConnell, Jamie Barber, Clarke Bartholomew and Grant Dowdy. 
Papa was also a great-grandfather to Grace and Evelyn OConnell, Elliot 
Stewart, and Willow Tapia. He was known as Apple Jack to his nephew 
Todd and nieces Tracy and Taylor.
  He was preceded in death by his brother Michael G. Stewart and wife 
Barbara.
I was not present for one vote during the 
vote series last night. Had I been present, I would have voted NO on 
Roll Call No. 383.
I rise today to honor Jim 
Weber who recently retired after a 47-year career at the Port of 
Everett. A native of Marysville, Washington, Jim began working at the 
Ports marina as a seasonal employee while attending Marysville-
Pilchuck High School. Jim did whatever needed to be done--pushing a 
broom, checking moorings and taking meter readings. Four years later, 
he landed a full-time job with the maintenance team. Over the next 43 
years, Jim worked his way up at the marina--from maintenance journeyman 
to maintenance foreman to operations director. His hard work and

dedication earned him great respect among his colleagues and everyone 
he encountered at the Port.
  Jims storied career paralleled the growth of the Port of Everett. 
When Jim first started working at the marina in the 1970s, the Port 
hosted fishermen, mill workers and log tug crews; its central marina 
was home to fewer than 1,000 slips. Over the next 50 years, Jim played 
a central role in the transformation of the Port from an industrial 
waterfront into the largest public marina on the West Coast, helping to 
design, build, maintain and upgrade many of the marinas facilities, as 
well as the Jetty Landing boat launch, Jetty Island docks and Boxcar 
Park. Today, the new and improved Port is the ``jewel of Snohomish 
County, a place where people can work, shop, go out to eat and enjoy 
the outdoors, thanks to the hard work of people like Jim Weber. Jim was 
involved in and had time to enjoy many of the great events the Port 
offers throughout the year, including Wheels on the Waterfront, Sail-In 
Cinema, Holiday on the Bay, waterfront concerts, Opening Day of Boating 
and fishing derby events.
, Jim Webers accomplishments are many, and his commitment 
to the Port of Everett is remarkable. As Jim told the Everett Herald in 
a recent article, he plans to dig his toes in the sand a bit and buy a 
few more classic cars in retirement. Congratulations to Jim on a well-
earned retirement. We hope to see him showing off his newest classic 
car at Wheels on the Waterfront.
Title IV of Senate Resolution 4, agreed to by the Senate of February 
4, 1977, calls for establishment of a system for a computerized 
schedule of all meetings and hearings of Senate committees, 
subcommittees, joint committees, and committees of conference. This 
title requires all such committees to notify the Office of the Senate 
Daily Digest--designated by the Rules Committee--of the time, place and 
purpose of the meetings, when scheduled and any cancellations or 
changes in the meetings as they occur.
  As an additional procedure along with the computerization of this 
information, the Office of the Senate Daily Digest will prepare this 
information for printing in the Extensions of Remarks section of the 
Congressional Record on Monday and Wednesday of each week.
  Meetings scheduled for Thursday, September 14, 2023 may be found in 
the Daily Digest of todays Record.

     10 a.m.
       Committee on Finance
       Subcommittee on Health Care
         To hold hearings to examine aging in place, focusing on 
           the vital role of home health in access to care.
                                                            SD-215
       Committee on the Judiciary
         To hold hearings to examine corporate manipulation of 
           Chapter 11 bankruptcy.
                                                            SD-226
     2:30 p.m.
       Committee on Appropriations
       Subcommittee on Financial Services and General Government
         To hold hearings to examine proposed budget estimates and 
           justification for fiscal year 2024 for the Federal 
           Communications Commission.
                                                            SD-124
       Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
       Subcommittee on Emerging Threats and Spending Oversight
         To hold hearings to examine advanced technology, focusing 
           on threats to national security.
                                                            SD-562

     10 a.m.
       Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs
         To hold hearings to examine artificial intelligence in 
           financial services.
                                                            SD-538
       Committee on the Budget
         To hold hearings to examine public investment.
                                                            SD-608
       Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation
         To hold hearings to examine the nominations of Rebecca 
           Kelly Slaughter, of Maryland, Melissa Holyoak, of Utah, 
           and Andrew N. Ferguson, of Virginia, each to be a 
           Federal Trade Commissioner, and Douglas Dziak, of 
           Virginia, to be a Commissioner of the Consumer Product 
           Safety Commission.
                                                            SR-253
     2:15 p.m.
       Joint Economic Committee
         To hold hearings to examine growing the economy of the 
           future, focusing on job training for the clean energy 
           transition.
                                                            SH-216
     2:30 p.m.
       Committee on Energy and Natural Resources
       Subcommittee on Water and Power
         To hold hearings to examine drought impacts on drinking 
           water access and water availability.
                                                            SD-366
       Committee on Environment and Public Works
       Subcommittee on Fisheries, Water, and Wildlife
         To hold hearings to examine drinking water infrastructure 
           and tribal communities.
                                                            SD-406
     3:30 p.m.
       Committee on Veterans Affairs
         To hold hearings to examine improving mental health and 
           suicide prevention measures for our Nations veterans.
                                                            SR-418

     10 a.m.
       Committee on Environment and Public Works
         To hold an oversight hearing to examine the General 
           Services Administration, focusing on examining the 
           Federal real estate portfolio.
                                                            SD-406

     10 a.m.
       Committee on Environment and Public Works
       Subcommittee on Chemical Safety, Waste Management, 
           Environmental Justice, and Regulatory Oversight
         To hold hearings to examine solutions to address beverage 
           container waste.
                                                            SD-406
I rise today to pay tribute to a proud 
South Carolinian, a devoted public servant, and a dear friend, Daniel 
``Danny Lee Cromer. Danny transitioned to eternal rest on September 
5, 2023, in Columbia, South Carolina. His brilliance and personality 
will be remembered by all who were fortunate to meet him.
  Daniel Lee Cromer was born on August 19, 1958, in Greenville, South 
Carolina. He was a proud graduate of Carolina High School and of the 
University of South Carolina where he earned a Bachelor of Arts in 
Political Science in 1980. He furthered his studies in public 
administration and social work at his beloved alma mater.
  In 1981, Danny embarked on what would become a lifetime career in 
public service beginning in the office of two governors of South 
Carolina, Governor Richard Wilson Riley, a Democrat, and Governor 
Carroll A. Campbell, Jr., a Republican. In those offices, Danny 
coordinated federal grant applications and intergovernmental review for 
all federal programs across the state of South Carolina.
  Following my election to Congress in 1992, Danny moved to Washington, 
D.C. and joined my staff as Legislative Director, a position he would 
serve in for 18 years. Danny quickly developed expertise in federal 
spending and the appropriations process. He viewed his role as a 
champion of poor communities in South Carolina and was committed to 
channeling federal investment to people that needed it most. Building 
on his experience in my office, he served on the staff of the House 
Appropriations Committee before retiring in 2013. Danny was integral to 
many of my legislative accomplishments but perhaps his proudest 
achievement was his work creating the Gullah Geechee Cultural Heritage 
Corridor. Having worked for years on the legislation which passed in 
2006, the Secretary of Interior appointed Danny to the Gullah Geechee 
Cultural Heritage Corridor Commission where he served for 14 years.
  Danny was an iconic character on Capitol Hill. While a passionate 
Democrat, he was often called on by members of Congress and staff from 
both sides of the aisle to find solutions to thorny appropriations and 
legislative issues. Never shy with his opinions or his unique Southern 
sense of humor, Danny made an indelible impression on all who met him, 
from visitors to my office to colleagues. He was passionate about 
mentoring interns and young staffers, always taking time to teach and 
impart lessons from his experiences.
  Danny was a devoted, longtime parishioner of St. Monica and St. James 
Episcopal Church on Capitol Hill, often inviting his friends and 
colleagues to join him for worship. His love for the church knew no 
bounds and he was particularly proud of his service on the vestry. He 
relished the high mass, organ music, and rituals of the Episcopal 
Church. After relocating to Columbia, he joined St. Timothys Episcopal 
Church.
, I ask that you and our colleagues join me in honoring 
the remarkable life of Danny Cromer. Danny often quoted a Morman hymn: 
``Do what is right, let the consequence follow. Danny lived by those 
words, and the people of South Carolina are better off because of his 
adherence to them. I will always remember Danny and he will be sorely 
missed.