I rise to recognize the Tri-Valley 
Nonprofit Alliance on a decade of uplifting and supporting Tri-Valley 
nonprofit organizations, as they celebrated their ten-year anniversary 
on Thursday, March 14, 2024.
  Founded in Livermore 2014 by Kathy Young and Mony Nop, the Tri-Valley 
Nonprofit Alliance has fostered support for its growing network of over 
300 community-based nonprofit organizations through education, 
collaboration, and financial support. The Tri-Valley Nonprofit Alliance 
offers educational workshops, industry-related seminars, workforce 
development programming, and access to a supportive professional 
network through their monthly meetings and networking events. To date, 
the Tri-Valley Nonprofit Alliance has offered over 100 educational 
workshops specifically for nonprofit organizations.
  The Tri-Valley Nonprofit Alliance provides financial support through 
its Tri-Valley Nonprofit Fund, which has given over $380,000 in grants 
to more than 40 nonprofits. This financial support is crucial to help 
organizations carry out diverse programs to help those in need.
  In June 2022, the Tri-Valley Nonprofit Alliance opened the 
CommonPoint Nonprofit Center in Downtown Livermore, offering physical 
workspaces and offices for over 20 growing organizations and 
consultants.
  The Anti-Poverty Collaborative is another Tri-Valley Nonprofit 
Alliance-led initiative, and yet another example of their innovative 
thinking and solutions. It seeks to eradicate poverty by bringing 
together leaders from nonprofit organizations, faith organizations, and 
elected officials to create innovative policies and solutions to create 
systems-level change.
  With mindful guidance and leadership, Tri-Valley Nonprofit Alliance 
has become a force for good in my district. They have fostered a safe 
space for nonprofits, big and small, to collaborate and grow. I 
appreciate their work and wish them many more years of success.
the Isle of Eight Flags, Fernandina 
Beach, Florida is home to many great things, whether it be the beaches, 
parks, or our pirate legacy; now we are also home to a wrestling state 
champion.
  I rise today to celebrate Enzo Gamba, a Fernandina Beach High School 
Pirate from my hometown of Fernandina Beach who recently won the 
Florida High School Athletic Association wrestling championships.
  Enzo, just like the Fernandina Beach pirates of old, went for the 
treasure and brought home gold. Competing in Class 1A at the 157-pound 
division, Enzo won the final by decision, 8-4. Not only did this 
victory win him a state championship, but it also capped off an 
undefeated season for Enzo. Fifty-four matches, Fifty-four victories.
  Enzo was phenomenal all season long and winning the state 
championship firmly lands him on the map as one of the all-time great 
Pirate athletes. We are exceptionally proud of this young man.
  The Pirates team, led by Coach Eric Kubatzke, brought home four 
individual state medals in total at the wrestling championships. All of 
Fernandina Beach High School, under the leadership of Principal Chris 
Webber, played a role in this success.
, on behalf of Fernandina Beach and Floridas 4th 
Congressional District, I ask that my colleagues in Congress join me in 
congratulating Enzo on this remarkable achievement.
I rise in opposition to H. Res. 1065, 
Denouncing the Biden administrations immigration policies.
  House Republicans have again brought to the House Floor a partisan 
messaging resolution that does nothing to begin to fix our broken 
immigration system. If House Republicans were serious about solving the 
problems at our southern border, they would negotiate and work to pass 
bipartisan legislation that could be approved by both the House and the 
Senate and be signed into law by President Biden.
  Instead, they continue to attack the current administration to gain 
cheap political points. As Ive said many times this Congress, House 
Republicans continue to waste our time and

resources on messaging bills like this do-nothing resolution, instead 
of working together with Democrats to solve problems for the American 
people.
it is my honor to recognize the 
life and legacy of Mary Esther Rodriguez, who passed away on Sunday, 
March 10, 2024 in the town of Losoya, Texas.
  Mary Esther Rodriguez was born October 4, 1944 in San Antonio, Texas. 
The oldest of ten children, she was a devoted wife, mother and 
community servant who enjoyed volunteering her time to help those in 
need.
  As a young woman right out of high school she began working as a 
nurses aide at the San Antonio State Hospital and later focused her 
energy as a Home Health Aide for the sick and elderly.
  A woman of deep faith she began teaching religious education at 19 
years of age and eventually became the Director of Religious Education 
at El Carmen Catholic Church in Losoya. She was moved to instill and 
strengthen the role of faith in the lives of children in the same 
manner that faith guided her life.
  An active member of The Ladies of Charity of Our Lady of Mount Carmel 
Church, she lived by their motto ``to serve rather than be served, in 
humility, simplicity and charity. As a member she visited 
parishioners in nursing homes and the homebound, offering assistance to 
the poor in the community. She helped run their community service 
programs including the thrift store and wellness center.
  She leaves behind her husband, Ramon Rodriguez, a veteran of the U.S. 
Air Force, whom she shared a life of love, joy and many blessings over 
more than 57 years. She will be remembered by her daughters Rosalinda 
and Elizabeth, her sons-in-law Henry Macias and Estuardo Rodriguez and 
her most treasured grandchildren, Maria Isabella, Valencia Lael, 
Nicolas, Fidel, Abram, and Emilio. She will forever remain the heart of 
the Rodriguez family and serve as an unyielding call to charity and 
service for those she leaves behind.
I rise with the people of St. Louis to honor 
the outstanding tenure of Reverend Dr. Anthony L. Riley. Rev. Riley has 
served as Senior Pastor at Central Baptist Church for five years.
  As a historically Black church in the St. Louis community, Central 
Baptist Church has a rich 178-year-old history. Rev. Riley has made his 
mark as the churchs fourteenth senior pastor. He formerly served as 
Executive Pastor for the Luke Church in Texas, where he provided 
leadership to staff, associate ministers, and diaconate.
  As a loving husband, devoted father, and dedicated pastor to the 
congregants of Central Baptist Church, Rev. Riley has consistently 
answered the call of public service. In 2022, Rev. Riley earned his 
Doctorate of Ministry degree in Leadership and Preaching at Virginia 
Union Universitys School of Theology. Within his education and 
ministry, Rev. Riley

has strived to establish holistic practices for the next generation of 
ministers. His goal of teaching and unifying our communities of faith 
distinguishes him as a leader for all people.
  Rev. Riley truly embodies the principles of love, dignity, service, 
and humility that define the characteristics of a successful leader in 
ministry. On behalf of Missouris First District, I congratulate Rev. 
Riley on his five-year anniversary and thank him for his continued 
commitment to service.
I rise today to recognize a constituent 
who has dedicated decades of service to our community through his 
commitment to the Boys &amp; Girls Club of Clifton, Mr. Robert Foster. For 
forty-seven years, Robert played an integral role, shaping the lives of 
countless young people in our district. ``Mr. Bob, as he is 
affectionately referred to, announced his retirement in December of 
2023 after serving as Executive Director for seventeen years. The Boys 
and Girls Club of Clifton is right to honor his legacy at their Annual 
Great Futures Gala.
&amp; Girls Club began at the age 
of five when he followed his older brothers to the Club in Kingston, 
New York. Inspired and grateful for the coaching, mentoring, and 
encouragement he received, Mr. Foster knew from a young age that he 
would continue his participation by pursuing a career in the Boys &amp; 
Girls Club of America (BGCA).
  After obtaining a Bachelor of Science from Springfield College, Mr. 
Foster started his career in the Boys &amp; Girls Club of Clifton. He 
served as the first full-time Social Recreation/Team Director. During 
this time, Mr. Foster fulfilled diverse roles such as Swim Instructor, 
Coach, Program Director, Operations Director, and Assistant Executive 
Director. By 2006, Mr. Foster earned his Masters of Human Resource 
Development at Clemson University and was appointed as Executive 
Director at the Boys &amp; Girls Club of Clifton. His work for the Boys &amp; 
Girls Club expanded beyond Clifton serving as the Acting Director of 
the City of Garfield from 2007 to 2009 as well as the Treasurer and 
member of the Executive Board of the Boys &amp; Girls Club of New Jersey.
  As Executive Director of the Boys &amp; Girls Club of Clifton, Mr. 
Fosters leadership contributed to the Clubs growth ultimately 
accumulating 5,400 registered members. He collaborated with the Board 
of Trustees to manage an operational budget of $6.4 million which 
accounted for 28 full-time and 175 part-time staff members, all program 
operations, and the appointment of a new chief executive officer. 
During his tenure, Mr. Foster partnered with the Clifton Board of 
Education to establish the Minds in Motion, 21st Century Grant for 
Schools No. 4, No. 12, and No. 17. Mr. Foster embodied the values of 
service over self and effectively empowered our youth by fostering 
their personal and academic growth.
  Outside of the Boys &amp; Girls Club, Mr. Fosters community service 
throughout the years includes his involvement in Cliftons Interagency 
Council, the Passaic County Workforce Development Council, Clifton 
Optimist Club, Rotary Club of Clifton, and his work as a Commissioner 
with the Clifton Board of Recreation.
, I ask that you join our colleagues, Mr. Fosters family, 
friends, and all those whose lives he has touched in recognizing Robert 
Foster for his dedication and contributions to his community and the 
State of New Jersey. May his work be a guiding light in our community 
and inspire others to strive for excellence in service.
I rise today to recognize Pine Ridge Baptist 
Church in Kountze, Texas, on its 150th year of ministry to the families 
and residents of Hardin County.
  Pine Ridge Baptist Church was chartered in 1874 by Rev. D.M. Jordan 
and his wife, Becky; W.J. Jordan; George B. Jordan and his wife, 
Sultana; Jessie Jordan and his wife, Missouri; Jordan Daniels; Rev. 
J.W. Teel and his wife, Milley; Mandy Jordan Shaw Cotton; Mary Jane 
Jordan Teel; Aletha Laird Herrington; and Thomas Laird.
  Land for the new church was donated by Rev. D.M. Jordan and 
constructed out of rough pine lumber. In its early years, homemade 
benches lined the walls for seating, handmade quilts were placed on the 
floor so children could relax or sleep during longer sermons, and 
church baptisms were held in Little Pine Island Bayou. Following Rev. 
Jordans death in 1906, his son-in-law, Rev. J.W. Teel, took on the 
role, and Pine Ridge has been led by many devoted pastors since. The 
church congregation has also grown exponentially over the past 150 
years, with membership currently at 240 believers.
  Pine Ridge owes much of its preserved history to a man named Nathan 
G. Jordan, who joined the church in the late 1890s. While serving as 
the churchs second clerk, Nathans meticulous recordkeeping is 
responsible for the many documents, obituaries, meeting minutes, and 
biographical information of the areas early settlers and church 
members still available today.
  Over the past 150 years, the church and its congregation have been 
unwavering in their commitment to sharing the good news of salvation 
with all who seek to know God. With its long history of service and 
leadership to the community, Pine Ridge Baptist Church continues to 
uphold the ideals and traditions of its founders.
  I offer my most sincere congratulations on this significant milestone 
and wish them continued prosperity as they keep to their mission of 
serving the community as the hands and feet of Jesus Christ.
I regret that I was not present for Roll 
Call votes on March 13, 2024. Had I been present, I would have voted 
YEA on Roll Call No. 86.
I rise today in opposition to H.R. 7521, 
the Protecting Americans from Foreign Adversary Controlled Applications 
Act.
  I agree with my colleagues that we must do more to protect personal 
information online, safeguard national security from foreign 
adversaries, and protect our electoral system from foreign 
interference, but this bill is far from the comprehensive approach our 
increasingly connected world needs. I also have serious concerns with 
the scope of the legislation and open constitutional questions about 
the path forward for its implementation.
  Targeting only one foreign adversary-controlled application will not 
fully protect consumers data in our nation. Energy &amp; Commerce 
Committee Chairwoman McMorris Rodgers and Ranking Member Pallone have 
already advanced bipartisan, comprehensive data privacy legislation, 
and the Biden Administration has issued an Executive Order to Protect 
Americans Sensitive Personal Data. Instead of addressing one company, 
as the bill we are considering today does, we could instead consider 
that bill or a related proposal that would improve how Americans access 
and control their data across all apps. The limited data safeguards in 
the Protecting Americans from Foreign Adversary Controlled Applications 
Act are not sufficient to justify what could amount to a ban on TikTok 
in our country.
  Civil liberties and legal experts have also raised concerns about 
potential constitutional questions regarding this bill. During his term 
former President Donald Trump issued several Executive Orders that 
would have had many of the same effects of this bill, but courts struck 
down those orders. Additionally, the state of Montanas legislation to 
ban TikTok and similarly prevent it from accessing application stores 
was recently put on hold for exceeding the authority of the state and 
potentially violating the First Amendment. I am also concerned that 
this bill limits legal challenges to just the first 165 days after the 
legislation is enacted and restricts challenges to actions taken under 
its authority to within 90 days of their implementation. These 
restrictions and ongoing constitutional questions about limiting 
consumer choice and speech could create significant uncertainty as the 
bill is implemented. We should not limit opportunities for Americans to 
protect their rights through our legal system.
  The First Amendment of the U.S. Constitution enshrines the protection 
of free speech and a press free from fear of retribution from the 
government. Protecting this right is a cornerstone of our democracy, 
and one that I am committed to upholding. I encourage my colleagues to 
vote against this bill so we can return to the table and negotiate a 
more comprehensive and effective approach to data privacy.
  Once again, I urge my colleagues to vote no.
I rise in support of H.R. 7521, the 
Protecting American from Foreign Adversary Controlled Applications Act.
  This legislation was passed out of the Energy &amp; Commerce Committee 
with a remarkable vote of bipartisanship, unanimously supported 50 to 
0, because our nation is facing a clear, emerging threat from foreign 
adversaries who have alarming access to Americans data. Their control 
of communications applications gives them the ability to push 
disinformation and propaganda campaigns literally into the hands of 100 
million Americans, including tens of millions of children.
  When you download an app, you should ask yourself: Who gains access 
to my information? How are they tracking it? How is it being used? Does 
a foreign government have access to it?
  With regard to TikTok, some answers are clear: TikTok is a company 
based in China that is regulated by its Communist government. TikTok is 
tracking users location information, online activity, and 
interactions. It is not clear the full extent to which users data is 
being used. Just last week, users were targeted and tracked, and 
received difficult-to-dismiss pop-up alerts. They were tracked based on 
their geo-location information, and pushed to call their Member of 
Congress, sharing a misleading message calling H.R. 7521 `the TikTok 
ban.
  This incident alone raises concerns about the security and safety of 
the American publics personal information and how it is being used. 
The public deserves to know about the risks to their privacy when using 
TikTok.
  I support H.R. 7521s provision requiring parent company ByteDance to 
sell TikTok within six months to continue operating. This bill would 
also give the President the authority to protect Americans from future 
threats from foreign adversaries--namely, China, Iran, North Korea, or 
Russia--by requiring that communications applications are divested from

their control if they pose significant threats to our national 
security.
  I urge my colleagues to support these protections for our national 
security and the integrity of our democracy.
it is with a heavy heart that I 
recognize the remarkable life of George William Young.
, Florida. 
George was the second baby born at the then newly completed Broward 
General Hospital in 1938. He attended Broward County public schools and 
graduated from Fort Lauderdale High School, and he was raised in a 
family with a long history of community service. His mother, Virginia 
S. Young, served on the School Board and was Mayor of Fort Lauderdale. 
His father, George F. Young, was a general contractor, as was his 
grandfather George Waugh Young. His grandfather established George 
Young Construction in 1911 and built many structures in Fort 
Lauderdale, including the Riverside Hotel and First United Methodist 
Church.
  George was a man with many talents, but education was his calling. In 
1969, he became Vice President of Student Affairs at Broward College, a 
position to which he would dedicate the next 30 years of his career. 
During his tenure, he developed student affairs divisions on four 
campuses, watching enrollment grow from 3,000 to 6,000 students. He 
believed everyone was entitled to a college education and devoted his 
career to mentoring those who might not otherwise have had the means to 
attend college.
  After retirement, George applied the building skills his father and 
grandfather had imparted upon him, building his own home on Lower 
Matecumbe in the Florida Keys. He enjoyed his retirement there and in 
Hendersonville, North Carolina, where he spent many vacations visiting 
his grandparents as a child. His greatest joy, however, came as a 
grandfather to his three grandchildren. He spent countless hours and 
time helping to mentor his three grandchildren into thoughtful and 
community-minded human beings. He passed down many of his virtues and 
passions to them, including a love of history, Lionel train collecting, 
and fishing. His collection of vintage Lionel trains is one of the 
largest in the country, the result of a passion he developed as a 
teenager while employed as the Lionel train repairman at Hobby House in 
downtown Fort Lauderdale.
  My heart is with Georges family, friends, and colleagues, but his 
loss will be felt by our entire community. His humility and kindness 
touched everyone who knew him.
I rise today to inquire about a possible and 
deliberate violation of U.S. imposed sanctions due to Russian 
aggression.
  As the war in Ukraine carries on and as Russian sanctions are 
imposed, I worry that our focus on Russian assets and agents in Europe 
has overlooked assets and agents in former Soviet republics such as 
Uzbekistan, Kazakhstan, and Kyrgyzstan.
  I would like to draw specific attention to various companies 
registered in Cyprus which operate in these former Soviet republics. 
One such example is a Cyprus-registered company which operates in 
Uzbekistan and Russia called United Cement Group (UCG).
  UCG acquired the Uzbekistan governments stake in one of the 
countrys largest cement factories in early 2022 in what has been 
described as an ``opaque transaction with no formal tender and a 
significant discount on the sale price. This acquisition by UCG has 
positioned the company to now control about 50 percent of Uzbekistans 
cement capacity.
  We are seeing monopolization under the guise of privatization, to the 
benefit of Russia.
  This is just one example of a bad actor in these relatively 
overlooked countries that are taking advantage of the international 
focus on Ukraine. I will be sending a letter to Treasury Secretary 
Yellen imploring her to further investigate these apparently corrupt 
improprieties and potential sanctions violations that continue to 
transpire in this region of the world.