I rise today to congratulate the Willow 
Street Fire Company in Willow Street, Pennsylvania on 100 years of 
service to the community.
  The Willow Street Fire Company was founded in June 1924 by volunteers 
that recognized the need to provide fire and emergency services to 
their community. Today, the companys 40-person membership remains 100 
percent volunteer-based, a reflection of their dedication to the well-
being of the community.
  You never know when you might need emergency services, but you are 
always thankful they are there when you need them. These heroes risk 
their lives in dangerous situations for people they likely do not know. 
This kind of selflessness is beyond admirable.
  Willow Street Fire Company responds to almost 500 calls every year 
and services West Lampeter Township and Providence Township. They also 
provide mutual aid to surrounding townships.
  For 100 years, Willow Street Fire Company emergency and rescue 
service volunteers have demonstrated what it means to be a good 
neighbor. I thank them for the heroism and bravery they demonstrate 
daily.
  Congratulations to Willow Street Fire Company. I wish them a happy 
100th anniversary.
I rise today to recognize and celebrate Bryson 
DeChambeau on his second career 2024 U.S. Open Golf Championship win. 
This achievement not only exemplifies his impressive skill and 
dedication to the sport, but also reminds us of his journey from the 
Central Valley of California to the pinnacle of professional golf.
  Originally born in Modesto, California, Bryson attended Clovis East 
High School, where his passion and innate talent for golf quickly 
became apparent. His first major golf moment arrived in 2010 when at 
age sixteen, he secured the California State Junior Championship. Five 
years later in 2015 as a Southern Methodist University Mustang, 
Brysons hard work led to winning the NCAA Individual Championship, 
along with the United States Amateur Championship. These dual wins 
propelled Bryson forward, becoming one of only five golfers to ever 
hold both titles in the same year and launching him into the 
professional ranks in 2016 at the age of twenty two.
  Unorthodox but confident in his approach, Bryson has reimagined golf 
using irons and wedges that are all the same length. This unique 
innovation, characteristic of the Central Valleys dynamic style, 
inspires future athletes to push boundaries as they see the U.S. Open 
Champion with nine career victories still finding new ways to excel in 
a game steeped in tradition.
, on behalf of my constituents in Clovis and Californias 
Central Valley, I am immensely proud of Bryson DeChambeau and 
congratulate him on his outstanding victory at the 2024 U.S. Open Golf 
Championship.
I rise today to congratulate my constituent, 
Caleb Toth, upon his acceptance to the United States Military Academy 
at West Point.
  As a future cadet, he will be joining the ranks of the worlds most 
fearsome fighting force--the United States Army--guided by duty, honor, 
and country.
  The service and sacrifice of Americas military personnel have 
safeguarded our Nation since its inception, defending our way of life 
from Lexington to Normandy.
  And throughout our history, American soldiers have demonstrated 
tremendous courage and strength, beating back tyranny to the ends of 
the earth.
  I was glad to sponsor Calebs nomination and I am confident that his 
talents will distinguish him among his peers both during his time at 
West Point and thereafter.
  Congratulations to Caleb, I know that he will make this Nation proud.
I rise today to congratulate my constituent, 
Kellen Daly, upon his acceptance to the United States Military Academy 
at West Point.
  As a future cadet, he will be joining the ranks of the worlds most 
fearsome fighting force--the United States Army--guided by duty, honor, 
and country.
  The service and sacrifice of Americas military personnel have 
safeguarded our Nation since its inception, defending our way of life 
from Lexington to Normandy.
  And throughout our history, American soldiers have demonstrated 
tremendous courage and strength, beating back tyranny to the ends of 
the earth.
  I was glad to sponsor Kellens nomination and I am confident that his 
talents will distinguish him among his peers both during his time at 
West Point and thereafter.
  Congratulations to Kellen, I know that he will make this Nation 
proud.
I rise today to congratulate my constituent, 
Patrick Rowan, upon his acceptance to the United States Naval Academy.
  As a future midshipman, he will be joining the ranks of the worlds 
most elite naval force, guided by the motto, ``Semper Fortis
  The service and sacrifice of Americas military personnel have 
safeguarded our Nation since its inception, defending our way of life 
from Lexington to Normandy.
  And throughout our history, American servicemembers have demonstrated 
tremendous courage and strength, beating back tyranny to the ends of 
the earth.
  I was glad to sponsor Patricks nomination and I am confident that 
his talents will distinguish him among his peers during his time at the 
Academy and thereafter.
  Congratulations to Patrick, I know that he will make this Nation 
proud.
I rise to honor Richard 
Zuschlag, a cofounder of Acadian Ambulance, national leader, and the 
very embodiment of Christian virtue.
  Following a valiant battle with cancer, marking the end of a full and 
accomplished life, Richard has gone home to the Lord. For all who knew 
him and felt his compassion, Richards 76 years are now the object of 
fond reflection and reverent admiration. His legacy will stand in 
perpetuity, sustained in the countless lives he touched.
  `Richard Zuschlag is a household name in Louisiana that is 
synonymous with charity, health care, and Louisiana business talent. 
Born in Pennsylvania, he first came to Louisiana as a young 
professional on work assignment. During this introduction, he came to 
love South Louisianas community, people, and way of life. Ultimately, 
he chose to stay. Ever community-minded, he recognized shortcomings in 
local EMS services.
  To fill this critical gap in medical service, Richard established 
Acadian Ambulance in 1971, as a provider of accessible, quality EMS 
care. He co-founded his Lafayette-based company with a revolutionary 
financing strategy, allowing clients to pay a very affordable yearly 
rate in exchange for full service. This winning formula opened private 
EMS service to Americans of all economic backgrounds. Richards vision 
continued to shape Acadian Ambulance in this way, carrying it on a sure 
trajectory to success.
  More than half a century after its humble start, Lafayette-based 
Acadian Ambulance is a nationally respected provider of quality EMS 
services--the culmination of Richards career. All of Richards work 
functioned according to his personal philosophy, endowed by his 
Christian faith. This approach, aptly characterized as `putting people 
over profit, fused his business acumen and humanitarian impulse.
  Driven by these virtues, Richard was clearly destined to 
revolutionize the EMS industry, uplifting millions. In the wake of 
Hurricane Katrinas devastation, he deployed Acadian Ambulances 
services to ease the suffering of fellow Louisianans in New Orleans. 
Richard directed this operation out of pocket, in lieu of a government 
contract or any guarantee of compensation. This occasion was one of 
many on which he courageously justified his

charity with morality alone. He always gave with disregard to any 
notion of self-preservation, even when his business could not afford 
to. Richards Christian conduct of reckless selflessness foremost 
constitutes his life and legacy.
  Millions of Americans now live reassured in the promise of Richards 
work--EMS responders will come to their aid in moments of dire need. 
Richards dedication has already culminated in countless saved lives 
and grateful families. Take heart that every life saved by Acadian 
Ambulance, now and forever, will be graced with the professional 
compassion of Richard Zuschlag.
  As I contemplate the life of Richard Zuschlag, now in its entirety, 
Matthew 25 echoes in my mind: ``His lord said unto him, Well done, good 
and faithful servant, thou hast been faithful over a few things, I will 
make thee ruler over many things: enter thou into the joy of thy 
lord. Lord Jesus, thank you for Richard, and please hold him close in 
Your Kingdom.
I rise today to honor the achievements of 
Gunnery Sergeant Steven M. Phong.
  Gunnery Sergeant Steven M. Phong is a native of Long Beach, 
California. He graduated Recruit Training at San Diego, California on 
October 7, 2005 as a Private First Class.
  After completion of Recruit Training, he attended Marine Combat 
Training School (MCT) at School of Infantry, Area 52, Camp Pendleton, 
California. Once completing MCT he attended Military Occupational 
School (MOS) at Camp Johnson, North Carolina for training at Supply 
School for the Enlisted Basic Supply Course.
  In February of 2006, he reported to Marine Corps Air Station Cherry 
Point, North Carolina, Marine Corps Air Control Squadron 2, 2nd Marine 
Air Wing to serve as the Procurement and Fiscal Clerk.
  In August of 2014, Corporal Phong reported to Anti-tank Training 
Company, Site Support Broken Arrow, Oklahoma and served as the Company 
Supply Administrations Chief, Embarkations Chief, and the Anti-
Terrorism Assistant Officer.
  Corporal Phong assisted in deploying and redeploying marines in 
support of Marine Expeditionary Unit 31s Unit Deployment Program and 
the Georgia Train and Equip Program. He also supervised logistics 
movements for training programs including Northern Strike, 29 Palms 
Integrated Training Exercise, Cold Weather training, African Lion and 
Red Flag Alaska.
  In April of 2018 Sergeant Phong reported to 3d Supply Battalion, 
Combat Logistics Regiment 35, 3rd Marine Logistics Group in April 2018 
to serve as the Battalion Supply Administrations Chief.
  Sergeant Phong attended the Supply Chain Management Intermediate 
Course at Camp Futenma, Okinawa, Japan from August to September 2018.
  In August 2019 Staff Sergeant Phong then assumed the billet of the 
Battalion Supply and Material Management Chief in 3d Supply Battalion 
in August 2019.
  On August 13, 2021, Staff Sergeant Phong reported to Expeditionary 
Warfare Training Group Pacific and assumed his duties as the Supply and 
Material Management Chief. There he worked in a joint branch 
environment and supported multiple warfare training courses.
  Gunnery Sergeant Phong is currently serving as a Canvassing Recruiter 
in Recruiting Sub-station Orange County.
  Gunnery Sergeant Phongs personal awards include the Navy and Marine 
Corps Commendation Medal and the Navy Marine Corps Achievement Medal 
with two gold stars.
  I ask my colleagues to join me in honoring and celebrating the 
achievements of Gunnery Sergeant Steven M. Phong.
today, I introduce the Veterans Legal 
Support Act of 2024, which would allow the U.S. Department of Veterans 
Affairs (VA) to provide support to law school clinical programs that 
provide pro bono legal and support services to veterans, including 
assistance with disability claims and foreclosures. There are at least 
22 law schools that have clinics devoted to veterans legal needs, 
including the William &amp; Mary Law School Veterans Benefits Clinic, which 
was the first recipient of a ``best practice certification from the 
VA. There are many other law schools, such as the University of the 
District of Columbias David A. Clarke School of Law, that are 
interested in starting their own VA-certified clinics. More needs to be 
done to sustain and increase the number of these programs.
  I was a tenured professor at the Georgetown University Law Center and 
continued to teach a seminar there after being elected to Congress. I 
saw the expert assistance that clinical programs provide their clients.
  I urge my colleagues to support this bill, a concrete measure that 
would assist our veterans, who put their lives on the line for this 
country.
I rise today to recognize and commend 
the outstanding accomplishments of Afton Elementary Schools 
Environmental Protection Club, also known as the Green Team, which is a 
group of teachers and students in the Pennsbury School District whose 
hard work and dedication has garnered them well-deserved recognition 
both statewide and nationally.
  I am proud to announce the Green Team has secured first place in the 
state of Pennsylvania for their outstanding contributions to the 
environmental protection services and has been recognized as a runner-
up in the nation. This remarkable achievement is a testament to the 
passion, hard work, and commitment of the members and the following 
Advisors of the Green Team.
, Miss Emily Kopchinski, Ms. Angela 
     Petrucci, Miss Emily Kirsh.

  The Green Teams impact extends beyond Afton Elementary, as they have 
engaged in a multitude of initiatives aimed at promoting environmental 
conservation and sustainability. The Green Team has taken proactive 
steps to raise awareness about gas safety throughout their school in 
collaboration with PECO, ensuring their peers are equipped with the 
knowledge and resources necessary to stay safe and informed.
  The Green Teams dedication to beautifying their surroundings is 
evident in their initiative to plant daffodils, pick up trash, and 
clean up their schools courtyard, transforming neglected spaces into 
vibrant and welcoming environments for all to enjoy.
  In addition to their local efforts, the Green Team has demonstrated a 
strong commitment to global conservation efforts by raising money and 
awareness for endangered wildlife, contributing to vital conservation 
projects that are essential for preserving our planets biodiversity.
  The Green Teams achievements serve as an inspiration to us all, 
reminding us of the profound impact that dedicated individuals can have 
on safeguarding our planet for future generations. The students who 
served on the Green Team for the 2023-2024 school year are:

       Abigail Perez, Bridget McCarthy, Chase Geipel, Easton 
     Samuels, Hailey Powell, Jack Fitch, Keshav Dave, Maddie 
     Behme, Rose Nini, Violette Hausner, Agalya Manikandan, 
     Brooklyn Bromberg, Daniel Hartman, Ethan Moses, Hazel 
     DeSantis, Jaya Dave, Lila Kelly, Nayan Aggarwal, Sienna 
     Burton, Xander Matlick.
       Avery Cumberland, Caitlin Castner, Daniel Stauss, Gloria 
     Naumovich, Henry Bankoske, Justin Navon, Luca Incontro, 
     Reuben Hollins, Stevie Birnbaum, Benjamin Strauss, Caroline 
     Fitch, Danielle Bosque, Grace Carr, lshaan Moghe, Kaitlin 
     Savage, Mackenzie Holmgren, Riley Fitzpatrick, Veer Gandhi.

  Therefore, it is with the utmost admiration and appreciation that I 
commend the Afton Elementary Environmental Protection Club for their 
outstanding contributions to environmental conservation and 
sustainability. May their passion and dedication continue to inspire 
others to join them in the noble cause of protecting our planet.
, I applaud the exceptional achievements of the Afton 
Elementary Environmental Protection Club.
RECOGNIZING BUCKS COUNTY DISTRICT ATTORNEYS OFFICE BUCKS COUNTY CHIEF 
              OF DETECTIVES MARTIN McDONOUGHS RETIREMENT
I rise today with a profound sense of 
admiration and gratitude to recognize an exceptional constituent from 
my district, Detective Martin McDonough of the Bucks County Police 
Department who is retiring after over three decades of unwavering 
dedication to the wellbeing of citizens in the community.
  Martin is a native of Holland, Pennsylvania. In addition to his 
studies at Spring Garden College and Temple University, his commitment 
to professional growth led him to achieve a remarkable milestone in 
2015 when he graduated from the prestigious FBI National Academy. This 
achievement not only showcased his relentless pursuit of excellence but 
also underscored his resolve for helping others. Detective McDonough 
eventually settled in Jamison, where he and his wife of nearly forty 
years, Joanne, still live today. It was here

where they raised their two daughters, Megan and Emily. Their steadfast 
support has undoubtedly provided a foundation that allows Martin to 
serve to the best of his ability.
  Detective McDonough has always been called to a life of service. 
Martins journey in public service began as a member of the Warwick 
Township Fire Company. In 1981, he took the first steps towards his 
lifelong commitment to public safety by joining the esteemed ranks of 
the Northampton Township Fire Department, where he has served as a 
dedicated firefighter for over 40 years. His selfless contributions to 
the fire department exemplify his commitment to safeguarding the lives 
and property of our community members.
  Transitioning seamlessly from firefighting to law enforcement, Martin 
embarked on a distinguished career within various Police Departments. 
During his tenure, Detective McDonough has held titles of dispatcher, 
patrolman, detective, and later chief of detectives, demonstrating 
exemplary leadership and integrity at every turn. Martin worked as a 
dispatcher for Northampton Township for five years before becoming a 
patrol officer in Warrington Township in 1987. A year later he joined 
the Warwick Township Police Department where he climbed the ranks from 
Patrolman, Corporal, Detective, and lastly to Detective Sergeant. He 
dedicated 13 years of tireless service to this department, touching 
numerous lives in the community.
  In 2000, Detective McDonoughs career led him to the Bucks County 
District Attorneys office where he was a county detective for nineteen 
years. His unparalleled investigative skills and unwavering dedication 
to justice distinguished him as a formidable force against crime. After 
that committed time of service, Detective McDonough received a much-
deserved promotion, receiving the new role of Chief of Detectives. In 
his new role, McDonough directed a diverse unit composed of 23 
detectives including members of a drug strike force, who led or 
assisted municipal departments in the investigations of the countys 
highest-profile and most complex criminal cases. This enormous 
responsibility was a testament to Detective McDonoughs exceptional 
capabilities and leadership, earning him the respect and admiration of 
his colleagues and community members alike.
  I am eternally grateful to Detective McDonough for the life of 
committed service he has given to our community, district, and country. 
His selfless career is a shining example of civic stewardship that the 
next generations of law enforcement should strive to emulate. His 
leadership was instrumental in ensuring both the safety and security of 
our community. While Martins presence will be sorely missed, I am 
excited for his entry into this new chapter and extend my heartfelt 
thanks and congratulations to Detective Martin McDonough on his well-
deserved retirement.
today I want to recognize Fire Captain Jon 
Drennon for his twenty-five years of service with the Dearborn Fire 
Department in Michigans 12th District Strong.
  Fire Captain Drennon got his start in public service in 1999 as a 
Firefighter. After only one year of service, he received the first of 
many Meritorious Company Commendations. In addition, he has been 
recognized numerous times for valor and lifesaving. Over the course of 
his public service career, Fire Captain Drennon has committed himself 
to continuous professional development, completing numerous 
certification and educational programs in various rescue operations 
techniques and other technical programming.
  Fire Captain Drennon has been an outstanding public servant to the 
communities served by the Dearborn Fire Department. Please join me in 
recognizing his twenty-five years of commitment to protecting our 
families safety across Michigans 12th District Strong as we wish him 
well in his retirement.
today I want to recognize the 12th 
Congressional Districts Fire Engineer Robin Buchholz for her twenty-
five years of service with the Dearborn Fire Department.
  Fire Engineer Buchholz began her career as a firefighter with the 
Dearborn Fire Department in 1999. Over the past twenty-five years, she 
has been twice promoted and has remained steadfast in her commitment to 
service and keeping our communities safe. Fire Engineer Buchholz has 
been recognized over twenty-five times in her career for her exemplary 
record, including lifesaving and safe driving. She has also been 
awarded the esteemed Fire Chief Life Saving Award for life saving 
service and the Meritorious Company Commendation on multiple occasions. 
As Fire Engineer for the department, Ms. Buchholz has also obtained 
certifications in life support and rescue techniques.
  Please join me and our community in recognizing Fire Engineer Robin 
Buchholz for her twenty-five years of outstanding service to the people 
of Dearborn in Michigans 12th District Strong as we wish her well in 
her retirement.
I rise today to recognize an 
outstanding constituent of my district, Middletown Township Police 
Officer Nelson Webb, who is retiring on June 28, 2024, after 36 years 
of dedicated and faithful service to the citizens of Southeastern 
Pennsylvania.
  Nelson began his career in policing on June 24, 1990, as a Penndel 
Borough Police Officer. After six years with the Penndel Borough Police 
Department, he joined the Middletown Township Police Department on June 
24, 1996. During his distinguished career, he has received several 
department commendations for outstanding work. In addition, Nelson has 
served as a field training officer, a motorcycle patrol officer, and 
served for 20 years on the Bucks County South Central Special Emergency 
Response (SWAT) team.
  Beyond his accomplishments, Officer Webb embodies the essence of a 
devoted public servant. Modest and humble, he avoids the spotlight, 
preferring to lead through actions and example rather than words. His 
exemplary conduct serves as an inspiration to his colleagues, earning 
him respect as a true leader and mentor among his peers. In every 
sense, Officer Nelson Webb epitomizes the true law enforcement 
professional--a person of integrity, dedication, and great work ethic.
  I wish to congratulate Nelson Webb on his 36 years of service to the 
citizens of Bucks County and on his well-deserved retirement from the 
Middletown Township Police Department.
I would like to recognize the late Lieutenant 
Colonel Alexander Jefferson, a World War II Tuskegee Airman and one of 
Michigans most decorated pilots as we prepare to dedicate a community 
gathering space in his honor. Born in Detroit, he was the descendant of 
formerly enslaved people and would go on to become a Black trailblazer.
  One of the original Tuskegee Airmen, the U.S. Armys first Black Air 
Corps, Jefferson served as a P-51 fighter pilot with the Red Tail, 
332nd Fighter Group 301st Fighter Squadron in Ramitelli, Italy. His 
unit bravely escorted bombers into action, providing critical 
protection from enemy aircraft and without losing a single plane. 
Jefferson was captured as a prisoner of war on August 12, 1944, three 
days before the invasion of Southern France, after he was shot down 
while firing at German radar stations on the coast. Presumed dead, he 
was held for more than nine months. He was liberated by U.S. Forces on 
April 29, 1945.
  Following the war, Jefferson dedicated himself to education as an 
instrument instructor in advanced flight training at the Tuskegee Army 
Air Field in Alabama, continuing the storied Air Corps legacy of 
excellence in flight. He was discharged from active duty in 1947 and 
retired from the reserves in 1969. In his civilian life, Jefferson 
worked as an elementary school science teacher in Detroit, where he 
would retire as an assistant principal in 1979.
  He has received numerous awards and accolades for his bravery and his 
selfless service for our country, including the Purple Heart Award. He 
represented the best of Detroit. As we celebrate the dedication of the 
plaza in his honor, we offer our thanks for the service and legacy of 
Lieutenant Colonel Alexander Jefferson.