this month, I celebrate the significant 
contributions of Rosen Hotels to the Central Florida region. Starting 
with only one hotel, the Rosen organization has grown to over seven 
hotels, employing over 4,000 Central Floridians. The Rosen Hotels were 
established starting in 1974 and are now celebrating 50 years of 
service.
  Every year, the Rosen organization provides over 500 scholarships 
that benefit students in the Tangelo Park and Parramore areas. Most 
notably, Rosen Hotels has donated millions over its 50 years to 
creating the UCF Rosen School of Hospitality Management, which now 
ranks No. 1 in the Nation.
  The Rosen hotels have provided employment, welcoming stays, and 
memories to last a lifetime for many Floridians. I thank Rosen Hotels, 
for 50 years of dedication and service. Their contributions make a 
profound difference in our community, and we are grateful for their 
support and commitment to make Central Florida a better place for all.
I rise today to congratulate my 
hometown newspaper, the Santa Fe New Mexican, on its 175th Anniversary. 
The first issue of the paper was printed on November 28, 1849. The New 
Mexican has brought stories to life about gold strikes, floods, votes 
on prohibition, and debates on statehood. It has shared stories of the 
struggles and strength of the survivors of wildfires, informed voters 
about their local candidates, and anointed the best chile in the city. 
To keep democracy strong, it made sure voters understood the positions 
and perspectives of local candidates for office.
  Stories matter, and who tells them matters just as much. Thats why 
its important that an independent paper with integrity, like the New 
Mexican, has been telling stories about our communities since it was 
founded. Papers like the New Mexican help us be well informed, active 
citizens.
  In 2023, 34 reporters from the New Mexican won first place in the New 
Mexico Press Association Better Newspapers contest. Amongst the awards 
were best investigative reporting, best news writing, best feature 
photo, and best special section on the recovery from the Hermits Peak/
Calf Canyon fire in 2022.
  Independent journalism is a crucial foundation of democracy. Thats 
clear now more than ever, as we ward off fake news and alternative 
facts in the battle for our nations very soul.
  I still get a copy of the New Mexican delivered to my door every day. 
Their stories, from high school sports to national news are crucial to 
the work that I do. Most importantly, however, they are vital to the 
fabric of New Mexico.
  I like to think that future generations will sit with their cup of 
cafe and turn the pages to learn about their hometown from the Santa Fe 
New Mexican.
I rise today to recognize 
a member of CA-27s Edwards Air Force Base who has served with passion 
for over 20 years. As a Lieutenant Colonel in the United States Air 
Force, John D. Stock has dedicated his life to serving our Nation and 
training the next generation of pilots.
  John D. Stocks diligent service includes 3500 hours of flight time 
across two oceans and five continents. By executing successful 
operational missions, instructing pilots and aircrew personnel, and 
volunteering in his local community, his leadership has had a deep 
impact on the aviation community and beyond.
  I want to thank Lieutenant Colonel John Stock for his dedication and 
service. Our community is better because of him, and I look forward to 
seeing how he continues to make an impact on those around him.
I rise today to recognize and congratulate 
Drew Hedgecoe of Terry Sanford High School on winning his third 
consecutive NCHSAA 3A state championship in singles tennis.
  On May 11, 2024, Drew defeated South Central freshman Shaw Akula 6-2, 
6-3 to clinch the title. Due to his hard work and dedication, Drew is 
breaking records on the tennis court and could soon become the second 
tennis player in NCHSAA history to win four straight singles 
championships. Drew has made his school, and all of Cumberland County, 
extremely proud.
  I wish Drew all the best and hope to see him make history on the 
court and bring home another state championship next season.
, please join me today in congratulating Drew Hedgecoe on 
winning his third consecutive NCHSAA 3A State Championship in singles 
tennis.
I rise today to honor a 
dedicated broadcaster from Gulfport, Mississippi, Rip Daniels.
  Rip Daniels has made a significant impact on the field of 
broadcasting through his diverse content and raw nature for 30 years. 
He is a trailblazer and an insightful commentator.
94.5, The 
Peoples Station. JZ 94.5 was the first and is the only black-owned FM 
station on the Gulf Coast. In its 30-year run, the show has featured 
guests such as former President Barack Obama.
  Rip Daniels impact on broadcasting is seen through his dedication 
and commitment to his craft. He has broadcast from his studio, on the 
road, and abroad, capturing stories from Senegal, Tanzania, South 
Africa, Greece, and more. He has also witnessed and provided coverage 
of notable events such as Obamas presidential inauguration and the 
Million Man March.
  Beyond his broadcasting efforts, Mr. Daniels has launched a nonprofit 
called the Peoples Station Corporation. He is the CEO of the Almanette 
Restaurant and Hotel and the CEO of the American Blues Network, the 
Nations only 24/7 blues broadcast station.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in recognizing the 30 
years of JZ 94.5 as well as Rip Daniels contributions to the field of 
broadcasting.
I rise to honor Daniel Flavin, 
a uniquely integral Southwest Louisiana community leader. Dans career 
spanned business, politics, and philanthropy. No matter what his means 
were, he always worked to benefit those around him, his family, and 
God.
  Dans family moved to Lake Charles in 1972, where he attended and 
graduated from A.M. Barbe High School. Mr. Bill Flavin, Dans Father, 
was a Veteran of the Korean War and an industrious, self-made man. 
Despite generous offers that would force his family to leave the 
Southwest Louisiana community they had come to love, he resigned from 
his job and founded what is now the renowned Flavin Realty Inc. Dan 
once recalled that even at 86, his father still came to work every day. 
The Flavins principles are emblematic of Southwest 
Louisianas grit and ingenuity.
  Dan bought Flavin Realty from his father after graduating from 
McNeese State University, inheriting it just as he had his fundamental 
values. Under Dans management, Flavin Realty steadily grew into the 
organization we know today: Southwestern Louisianas eminent real 
estate firm. In recognition of his personal ability, Dan was twice 
awarded the Calcasieu Parish Realtor of the Year Award and was selected 
for leadership positions in Louisianas top real estate associations. 
Dan always showed great humility in his achievements, always giving 
credit to family and God above all.
  Throughout his life, Dans personal integrity and dedication reached 
beyond his own interests, overflowing into the community. He gave 
generously to charity and local causes. In 1996, Dan brought his 
talents to the state legislature, where he served his beloved SWLA 
community. His decade-long tenure in the Louisiana House of 
Representatives was noted by constituents as an era of major victories 
and development. Representative Flavins greatest legislative work came 
amid efforts to bolster the Port of Lake Charles. His concerted 
legislation and advocacy made the Port of Lake Charles our Nations 
10th largest, cementing an irreplaceable source of SWLA economic 
prosperity for years to come.
  This unwavering dedication to community was surpassed only by Dans 
intertwined love of family and God. After retiring from the state 
legislature in 2005, Dan spent the joyful final years of his life 
caring for the family business, surrounded by his wife Lisa and their 
six children, 20 grandchildren, and a community of friends. Dans love 
of God, family, and community made him an exemplary Louisianan by any 
definition. His work was always conducted according to our states 
unique intersection of government, business, and family values.
  Dan is survived by a big, beautiful Louisiana family and a forever 
grateful community. On behalf of Louisianas 3rd District, I thank Mr. 
Dan Flavin for his generous charity and lifelong service to Louisiana. 
As we continue to benefit from Dan Flavins legacy, I pray the Lord 
blesses his family and grants his reward in Heaven.
I rise today to recognize and congratulate 
the Union Pines Vikings, Coach Daniel Proud, and their Principal Andrew 
McCormick on their undefeated season and winning the NCHSAA 3A/2A/1A 
womens lacrosse state championship.
  The women of Union Pines lacrosse team have brought this years 
NCHSAA championship back home to Moore County. The Vikings defeated 
Bishop McGuiness High School 20-6 to clinch the title and cap off a 
perfect 18-0 season.
  The coaches and players of Union Pines have brought great pride to 
both their school and all of Moore County. I wish them all the best and 
hope to see them continue their success next season. Go Vikings.
, please join me today in congratulating the coaches and 
players of Union Pines High School on their victory in this years 
NCHSAA 3A/2A/1A Womens Lacrosse State Championship.
had I been present, I would have voted YEA 
on Roll Call No. 280.
I rise today to recognize Eric Jenkins, who 
was named Indiana Teacher of the Year.
  An Indiana native, Eric teaches English at Franklin Community High 
School, a high school in my district. Those who know him say that Eric 
is dedicated to his students and passionate about instilling a love of 
reading.
, I thank Eric for his work to grow our next generation of 
leaders.
I rise today in honor of Paul and Sandra 
``Sandy Pimentel. Both raised in Quincy, Massachusetts, Paul and 
Sandy first met as kids and began a friendship that would last a 
lifetime and eventually grow into a marriage spanning five decades. 
After graduating high school, Paul went on to attend Harvard 
University, where he received a degree in engineering and applied 
physics, before serving in Vietnam as a lieutenant in the United States 
Army. Sandy went on to attend the University of Massachusetts Boston 
and the Lynn Hospital School of Nursing, where she respectively 
received her

Bachelor of Arts in management of human services and a degree in 
nursing. After Paul and Sandy got married in 1965, the young couple 
moved to Long Beach, California, while Paul completed his military 
training, before moving to Albion, Michigan, where the Pimentels 
settled for many years with their children. In Albion, Sandy and Paul 
became active in forums and discussions at their church regarding 
racial integration and inequality as the civil rights movement 
continued to progress. It was also during this time that Sandy became 
friends with Barbara Gladney, and together the Pimentels and Gladneys 
started a dinner club called the ``Melting Pot. The multicultural 
social group gained such popularity that the dinners had to be moved to 
large event halls. After returning to Massachusetts, Sandy and Paul 
continued their important work advancing social change. Paul became the 
youngest Deputy Secretary of State for Massachusetts and helped to 
create Vineyard Power, a clean energy cooperative bringing offshore 
wind power to the Cape and Islands. Sandy served as the Director of 
Human Services for the Norfolk County District Attorneys office and 
received awards from the Department of Interior for her work 
implementing the Alliance Against Racism and Violence Program and from 
the State of California for her efforts to empower young people to 
address racism in their communities.
  Sadly, we lost Paul too soon on February 5, 2019, at the age of 76. 
Beyond their professional achievements, what Paul and Sandy valued most 
during their 53 years of marriage was their family. Together they 
raised their five children, Lisa, Christopher, Susan, Courtney, and 
Joanie, and many foster children. The hallmark of the Pimentel family 
has always been their dedication to uplifting those in their community 
and willingness to provide a warm and welcoming home for those who need 
it most. Over the years, the Pimentels have established themselves as a 
pillar of the Marthas Vineyard community, serving on countless 
committees and boards for local organizations, including Marthas 
Vineyard Community Services and the Marthas Vineyard Diversity 
Coalition Board of Trustees. To celebrate Sandy and Pauls work and 
commitment to helping others, Marthas Vineyard Community Services is 
holding a dedication ceremony for the newly named Paul and Sandra 
Pimentel Early Childhood Center on June 26, 2024.
, I am proud to honor Paul and Sandy Pimentel, and I ask 
that my colleagues join me in thanking them and celebrating their 
dedication to supporting and advocating for those in their community.
it is my honor to recognize the 
accomplishments of Rear Admiral Dana Thomas as she retires from the 
United States Coast Guard this year. I applaud RADM Thomas for her 
dedication and service and congratulate her on this milestone.
  Promoted to Rear Admiral (Upper Half) in March 2019, RADM Thomas has 
had an exemplary military career, previously serving seven years in the 
U.S. Coast Guard and seven years in the U.S. Army. She received her 
Doctor of Medicine and Master of Public Health degrees from George 
Washington University School of Medicine and Public Health, and her 
Bachelor of Science in Honors Biology from the University of Maryland, 
College Park. She completed Command and General Staff College in 2005. 
She served her Internship in General Surgery at Tripler Army Medical 
Center and her residency at the Naval Aerospace Medicine Institute.
  From her work with the Centers for Disease Control and service on the 
Physicians Professional Advisory Committee to the U.S. Surgeon 
General, to her current role as Director of Health, Safety, and Work-
life for the U.S. Coast Guard, RADM Thomas has continued her commitment 
to service and public health. Her experience, knowledge, and steadfast 
initiative have distinguished RADM Thomas as an outstanding leader who 
has exemplified honor, integrity, and professionalism throughout her 
career.
, please join me in leading this body in acknowledgement 
of the extraordinary contributions of Rear Admiral Dana Thomas. She has 
tirelessly devoted her time and expertise to the advancement of public 
health and I thank her for her honorable service to our great Nation.
I rise today to recognize the Ann Arbor 
Meals on Wheels on the occasion of 50 years of service to the

community. The care and service that they provide to homebound members 
of the greater Ann Arbor community is worthy of commendation.
  Ann Arbor Meals on Wheels began in 1974 as a program to provide 
homebound neighbors with fresh, nutritious meals. Since then, the 
program has expanded its services to include pet food delivery, home 
energy efficiency kits, personal care items, and wellness checks during 
drop-offs. Additionally, the program offers recipients a variety of 
meals that are inclusive of dietary restrictions, nutritional risks, 
and cultural traditions. Their delivery of over 120,000 of these meals 
to over 430 clients every year shows a distinct level of dedication and 
commitment to the community.
  Ann Arbor Meals on Wheels is a community effort. It is led by the 
University of Michigan Health Department of Community Health Services 
and is made possible by the additional support of more than 250 
volunteers. Staff at the Patient Food and Nutrition Services at 
Michigan Medicine work six days a week to prepare meals while 
volunteers assist in delivering meals, completing wellness checks, and 
providing community members with compassion and support. Many times, 
they are the difference in isolation as they build connections and care 
for those they serve. Ann Arbor Meals on Wheels also works with Lucky 
Kitchen, Washtenaw County, the Huron Valley Humane Society, DTE Energy, 
and other local institutions. This network of partnerships and 
dedicated volunteers demonstrates the integration of the program in the 
community, as well as the extent of the impact of the program.
, I ask my colleagues to join me today in celebrating the 
50th anniversary of Ann Arbor Meals on Wheels. For the last half-
century, the program has been diligently serving homebound members of 
the community when they need it most. We thank Ann Arbor Meals on 
Wheels and its team members for their service, and we are excited to 
see how the program will continue to serve the community.
Mr Speaker, I rise to acknowledge members of the Associated 
Equipment Distributors from all over the country who came to D.C. for 
their annual fly-in. These great men and women are entrepreneurs who 
provide millions of pieces of equipment to all kinds of industries in 
our country every year that help our countrys economy. They deserve 
our admiration and thanks. They certainly have mine.