COMMEMORATING THE CENTENNIAL ANNIVERSARY OF TEXAS A&amp;M UNIVERSITY-
                                of texas
I rise to congratulate 
Texas A&amp;M University at Kingsville on their 100-year anniversary.
  As we celebrate Texas A&amp;M University-Kingsvilles 100-year legacy, we 
must look back at their history and achievements and continue to build 
upon the universitys legacy of Care, Integrity, Pride, Innovation, and 
Excellence.
  On February 24, 1917, the State of Texas passed Bill No. 72, to 
establish a teacher training institution in South Texas. This 
institution would go on to be called the South Texas Teachers College. 
Eventually, in 1929, the school would once again change its name to the 
Texas School of Art and Industries.
  The Texas School of Art and Industries would later grow and expand to 
provide courses in agriculture and engineering.
  In 1941, the school briefly transitioned to a wartime curriculum, 
teaching national defense courses to support with the war effort. Two 
decades later it would become officially known as Texas A&amp;I University.
  In March of 1972, Texas A&amp;I was selected as one of the first schools 
in the country to offer ROTC for women, to eventually be commissioned 
into the U.S. Army as Second Lieutenants. In 1975, Texas A&amp;I would be 
the first university to offer a doctoral degree in bilingual studies.
  In 1989, Texas A&amp;I University joined Texas A&amp;M University System, one 
of the largest systems of higher education in the country.
  The list of achievements is endless, from the establishment of a 
groundbreaking serpentarium and the National Natural Toxins Center to 
the Opening of the Music Education Complex.
  Throughout its entire history, one thing remains certain, since its 
inception in 1917, Texas A&amp;M-Kingsville (TAMUK) has played a vital role 
in shaping the minds of some of our regions leading academics and 
professionals.
  Through their dedication to higher education, they have provided 
South Texas with an exceptional opportunity to succeed. Thereby, not 
only nurturing academic success but also molding the minds of the next 
generation of South Texans.
, I wish to thank Texas A&amp;M University at Kingsville for 
their contributions to our region and congratulate them on this 
remarkable milestone.
CONGRATULATING MAURO REZA, BOOTS ON THE GROUND ALLIANCES VETERAN OF 
                             of california
I rise today to honor Mauro Reza, a 
Vietnam War veteran from Palmdale, California, whose service and 
sacrifice exemplify the highest ideals of patriotism and dedication to 
our Nation. Mr. Reza was selected as this years Boots on the Ground 
Alliances Veteran of the Year, an honor his life and service 
absolutely merit.
  Born and raised in Whittier, Mauro was inspired by his uncle, a 
Korean War veteran, to continue his familys proud tradition of 
military service. Answering the call of duty, he enlisted in the United 
States Army in November 1966 and served with distinction as a UH-1C 
helicopter gunship pilot in the 175th Assault Helicopter Units 3rd 
Platoon Mavericks during one of the most challenging conflicts in 
American history. From August 1967 to June 1970, Mauro bravely took to 
the skies, engaging in aerial combat operations where skill and courage 
were paramount to mission success and the safety of his fellow 
soldiers.
  After years of valiant service, Mauro transitioned out of military 
life, recognizing the profound impact of his experiences in Vietnam. 
Yet, his legacy endures--not only through his military contributions 
but also in the example he sets for future generations about duty, 
resilience, and honor.
  It is with great respect and admiration that I recognize Mauro Reza 
for his selfless service to our country. His story is a testament to 
the courage of those who have fought for our freedoms, and I urge my 
colleagues to join me in expressing our gratitude for his dedication.
today I rise to honor the memory of Enrique 
``Kiki Camarena, a true American hero who gave his life fighting the 
drug trafficking operations of Mexican cartels. As a former law 
enforcement officer and Army reserve officer, I am deeply moved by 
Kikis bravery and sacrifice.
  Kikis remarkable career with the U.S. Drug Enforcement 
Administration took him from the

streets of Calexico to the halls of power in Mexico, where he 
fearlessly worked to dismantle the Guadalajara Cartel. His 
groundbreaking work led to the discovery of massive drug plantations 
and the arrest of high-ranking cartel members.
  Tragically, Kikis life was ended by the very criminals he sought to 
bring to justice. His brutal murder in 1985 shocked our Nation and 
sparked a renewed commitment to the battle against the Mexican drug 
cartels.
  The recent capture of Rafael Caro Quintero, one of the masterminds 
behind Kikis murder, is a testament to the tireless efforts of our 
great men and women in law enforcement. Its a reminder that justice 
may be delayed, but it will not be denied. Not to the United States of 
America.
  As we honor Kikis memory, we also reaffirm our commitment to 
continuing his vital work. We will not rest until our communities are 
safe from the greatest drug threat our country has ever faced, 
fentanyl, which is killing our young people at unprecedented rates.
  I urge my colleagues to join me in paying tribute to Kiki Camarena, a 
true patriot who gave his life in service to our Nation. May his 
sacrifice never be forgotten, and may his legacy inspire future 
generations to carry on his courageous work.
I rise today to honor the life and legacy of 
the late Congressman Raul Grijalva.
  Raul was one of was one of my dear friends in Congress and someone 
who I looked up to as a model for what real progressive leadership 
looked like.
  He was a legend for the Chicano activism of his youth, and a 
trailblazer who started his career in public service as a community 
organizer and activist.
  From his time on the school board to the County Board of Supervisors 
to the halls of Congress--Raul was always a voice for the voiceless.
  He left such a profound legacy on Tucsons school board that an 
elementary school was named after him years before he ever got elected 
to Congress.
  He was a fighter for working families his entire life and used every 
ounce of grit to deliver for his beloved community every day he was in 
office.
  He was a fighter for working families his entire life and used every 
ounce of grit to deliver for his beloved community every day he was in 
office.
  He was an uncompromising champion of the environment, of bilingual 
education, of the rights of immigrants, and of the rights of Native 
Americans.
  He was also a genuine human being to the very last, committed to what 
he believed in, who never let the petty politics of the day make him 
cynical, or hard, or mean.
  I am grateful for his commitment and unwavering courage that he used 
to make our country better.
  I will miss him greatly.
  I am sending love and light to his family, Ramona, Adelita, Marisa, 
and Raquel, his staff, and all who loved him.
due to unforeseen circumstances, I was 
unable to be present for votes on Monday, March 31, 2025. Had I been 
present, I would have voted: YEA on Roll Call No. 84 and YEA on Roll 
Call No. 85.
I honor Greg Edwards, President and 
CEO of Catch Des Moines, for his outstanding contributions to our 
community. Since joining in 2000, Greg has been a driving force in 
tourism and economic development, bringing his experience from Peoria, 
Illinois, and Overland Park, Kansas. Under his leadership, Catch Des 
Moines has grown into a premier destination marketing organization, 
strengthening the regions reputation and economy.
  Greg has successfully championed major projects transforming Des 
Moines, including the Wells Fargo Arena and the downtown Hilton 
convention hotel. His efforts also helped secure Des Moines as a 
recurring host for NCAA Division I events, including the first and 
second rounds of the Mens Basketball Tournament in 2016 and 2019, with 
another round secured for 2028. Additionally, he played a key role in 
reorganizing the Des Moines Area Sports &amp; Tourism Commission and served 
as chair of Destinations International.
  Beyond tourism, Greg was vital in revitalizing the city post-COVID 
and recently helped break ground on 515 Walnut, a 33-story skyscraper 
set to reshape the downtown skyline. His leadership has left a lasting 
impact on Des Moines, and we thank him for his service. We wish him 
success in his next endeavors and are confident he will continue making 
a difference.
I rise today to recognize a remarkable 
milestone in the history of Hoskins Drug Store &amp; Soda Fountain, a 
cherished community institution in Clinton, TN. For nearly a century, 
Hoskins Drugstore has been a cornerstone of the community, providing 
not only essential services but also a deep sense of connection and 
tradition.
  On April 4, 2025, Hoskins Drug Store will celebrate 95 years of 
service. Founded by R.C. Hoskins in 1930, Hoskins Drug Store quickly 
became more than just a place to fill prescriptions; it became a 
trusted destination where people could count on personalized service, 
quality products, and a warm, welcoming environment. R.C. Hoskins built 
a legacy that has endured for generations, one founded on integrity, 
commitment, and community care.
  As the years passed, the legacy of Hoskins Drug Store was carried 
forward by R.C. Hoskins daughters, Dudley Hoskins Bostic and Molly 
Hoskins Scarbrough, who continue to lead the business today with the 
same dedication and vision that their father demonstrated nearly a 
century ago. Their hard work and dedication have ensured that Hoskins 
Drug Store remains a beloved part of the community, staying true to its 
principles while adapting to the changing needs of the times.
  Today, we celebrate the achievements of Hoskins Drug Store, Mr. and 
, and the ongoing contributions of Mrs. Dudley Hoskins 
Bostic and Mrs. Molly Hoskins Scarbrough. Their enduring legacy is a 
testament to the power of family, tradition, and the unwavering 
commitment to serving the needs of the community.
  As Hoskins Drug Store enters its 95th year, we recognize and honor 
the Hoskins family for their incredible contributions to the community 
and the example they set for future generations of small business 
owners.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in congratulating Hoskins 
Drug Store on this incredible milestone and in honoring the legacy of 
``Dudley Hoskins. May this wonderful meeting place 
and business serve our community for many years to come.
I rise in recognition of National 
Public Health Week and the UT School of Public Health San Antonio. It 
is an honor to shed light onto a mission devoted to strengthening our 
communities, improving quality of life, and ensuring that everyone has 
equal access to quality health and wellness services.
  Health extends beyond clinics and hospitals. It is the cornerstone of 
a strong nation. By engaging our communities, public health workers 
address health care disparities and implement competent wellness 
programs that provide essential services to diverse communities.
  The opening of the UT School of Public Health San Antonio--the newest 
addition to the UT Health San Antonio system--underscores the 
dedication to implementing tools that lead to a healthier life. The 
institution is a step forward in addressing the challenges faced by 
communities in San Antonio and South Texas. Through cutting edge-
research, the new generation of public health workers will drive our 
nation forward.
, I am proud to recognize and bring attention to this 
special celebration.
RECOGNIZING THE HONORABLE STEVEN ``STEVE DARGAN, WEST HAVENS 2025 
                        IRISH PERSON OF THE YEAR
it is with great pleasure that I rise today 
to join the West Haven St. Patricks Day Committee as well as city and 
community leaders as they gather to honor our dear friend, Steven 
``Steve Dargan, as West Havens 2025 Irish Person of the Year. This 
special award is bestowed annually on a West Haven resident or couple 
of Irish descent who personifies service in the citys close-knit Irish 
community.
  Steve hails from an ancestry whose legacy is woven into the tapestry 
of the American story. Like so many of us, his familys story is one of 
emigration--of leaving the only home you know to search out a better 
life for yourselves and family. In the mid-1800s, Steves paternal 
great-grandparents, Pierce and Ellen Dargan, emigrated from Ireland to 
the United States and settled in New Haven. His maternal grandparents, 
John Glacken and the former Margaret McGowan, who left County Donegal 
and Derry, Northern Island respectively, for America at different times 
in the early 1900s. They met and married, first settling in Norwich 
before making West Haven their home.
  Steve was born in New Haven in 1955 to Margaret and Robert Dargan, 
Jr. He and his siblings--Robert Dargan, III, Timothy Dargan and Mary 
Margaret Dargan--were raised by their hardworking parents in a 
traditional Irish Catholic household on Richards Place in the center of 
West Haven. Steve attended public schools and graduated in 1973 from 
West Haven High School, where he ran track. He also attended Quinnipiac 
College. It was through his parents that Steve learned the importance 
of giving back to his community and he took those lessons to heart, 
dedicating most of his adult life to public service. In fact, his late 
father, Robert, was honored with this same award in 2012, making them 
the only father/son recipients its 32-year history.
  Steve has represented his community as an appointed or elected leader 
since he was 21 years old. He served on the City Council from 1985 to 
1991 and the First Fire Taxation Districts Board of Fire Commissioners 
from 1980 to 2004. As a member of the Connecticut House, Steve 
represented West Havens 115th District from 1991 to 2017. For 20 
years, he was a co-chair of the General Assemblys Public Safety and 
Security Committee, which oversees all matters related to civil 
preparedness, state and municipal police, and the overall safety of 
residents. He also served on the Gaming Policy Task Force, the Police 
Pursuit Task Force and the Private Security Personnel Task Force as 
well as on the Executive and Legislative Nominations Committee and the 
Insurance and Real Estate Committee. In January 2017, Steve resigned to 
serve on the state Board of Pardons and Paroles, a seat which he still 
holds.
  In addition to his civil service, Steve has dedicated much of his 
time and energy to a myriad of local organizations. He is a former 
volunteer for West Haven Hook and Ladder Company 1, a longtime member 
of the West Haven Irish American Club, a lifetime member of West 
Havens Elks Lodge 1537, and a former member of the Knights of St. 
Patrick in New Haven, Connecticuts oldest continuously run Irish 
society.
  I would be remiss if I did not also take this opportunity to extend a 
personal note of thanks to Steve for his many years of friendship and 
support. Steve has always been known for his gregarious nature, ready 
smile, and big heart. Elected to our respective seats, myself to 
Congress and Steve to the General

Assembly, in the same year, we have developed a special kinship, rooted 
in our passion for service and desire to make a difference in the lives 
of others. I am so proud to stand today to extend my heartfelt 
congratulations to Steve Dargan on this very special occasion. Steve 
has dedicated a lifetime of service to the community he calls home, and 
I cannot think of a more fitting accolade to recognize his dedication 
and commitment.
I am proud to recognize and salute 
a great Texan, Representative Terry Wilson, U.S. Army, Retired, with a 
Congressional Veteran Commendation. His life and career reflect hard 
work and selfless service to his nation and Central Texas
  Enlisting in the Army after graduating from high school, COL Wilson 
honorably served on Active Duty for 29 years and the Texas National 
Guard for 3 years. During his career, he courageously served our nation 
in both Iraq and Afghanistan. His exemplary service earned him numerous 
awards and accolades, including the Bronze Star, Legion of Merit, 
Defense Meritorious Service Medal and Army Commendation Medal, among 
many others. He is a graduate of the U.S. Army War College, Ranger 
School, Airborne School and Pathfinder School.
  After his retirement, COL Wilsons dedication to his community did 
not waiver. He now serves as the Texas State Representative for House 
District 20. As Chairman of the House Committee on Defense &amp; Veterans 
Affairs, he fights tirelessly for our brave servicemembers and 
leverages his expertise as an Army Acquisitions Officer to deliver 
critical capabilities to our warfighters. He is also a champion for 
expanding vocational education for all students, ensuring they are job- 
or college-ready upon graduation.
  COL Wilson continues to lead with strength, integrity, and dedication 
for the betterment of his community. Aside from his role as State 
Representative, he strives to support the next generation, serving as 
an Assistant Scout Master and regularly speaking to students and 
working on special projects.
  I am honored to join COL Wilsons fiends and family in celebrating 
his outstanding achievements. His commitment to selfless service makes 
him a deeply respected and honorable recipient of the Congressional 
Veteran Commendation.