I rise today to recognize the American 
Institute For Foreign Study (AIFS) in Stamford, Connecticut, as they 
celebrate their 60th anniversary. Since their inception in 1964, AIFS 
has pioneered cultural exchange and educational enrichment, having 
impacted the lives of over 1.8 million individuals and deepened 
relationships across international borders.
  In partnership with the U.S. Department of State, AIFS continues to 
operate a diverse selection of programs for their nearly 40,000 annual 
participants, including study and travel abroad, high school exchange, 
camp counselor, and intern/trainee programs, which epitomize the 
Administrations dedication to diverse partnerships. It is my unique 
honor to recognize the American Institute For Foreign Study for their 
60th anniversary.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in celebrating AIFS and 
their dedication to cross-cultural exchange.
I rise today to congratulate the 
Hampton High School Mens Basketball Team from Hampton, Virginia on 
becoming the Virginia High School Leagues Class 4 State Champions.
  On Friday, March 8, 2024, the Hampton Crabbers won the championship 
game against the Tuscarora Huskies with a score of 66-63. Led by Coach 
Eric Brown, the Crabbers won this title for the sixth time, the first 
since 2012. Hampton High School closed their season with a record of 26 
wins and 2 losses, maintaining a 16-game winning streak.
  Throughout the game, the Crabbers and Huskies fought for control of 
the court, with the Crabbers maintaining the lead. But victory for the 
Crabbers would not come easily, as the Huskies consistently chipped 
away at their lead. With 20 seconds left on the clock, senior Daron 
Baugh sank two free-throws to give the Crabbers the final 66-63 lead. 
The Crabbers fought hard and stayed determined until the game was over, 
and because of that, they were able to secure the championship.
, I want to again congratulate the Hampton High School 
Basketball Team and thank Coach Brown, the parents, and the entire 
Hampton High School community for supporting these students throughout 
the season. They have all made their community proud. I wish them the 
best in their future endeavors, and I wish the program continued 
success.
I rise today to honor the life and legacy of 
Alexei Navalny, who made the ultimate sacrifice in his fight for 
freedom, democracy, and basic human rights.
  For more than a decade, Navalny courageously led the unflinching 
opposition against Russian President Vladimir Putin and his evil 
cronies.
  Determined to create a truly democratic Russia, Navalny exposed Putin 
for who he truly is: a murderous, corrupt dictator.
  In August of 2020, officers of the Russian government attempted to 
kill Navalny by poison, forcing him to be evacuated and hospitalized in 
Germany.
  Despite this attempt on his life, Navalny never wavered and, after 
miraculously recovering from this attempted murder, insisted on 
returning to Russia to continue his mission of bringing freedom to his 
countrymen.
  Upon his return home, Navalny was wrongfully imprisoned by Russian 
authorities for the remainder of his life and, tragically, to his 
death.
  His only crime was his determination to speak out in the face of 
oppression and advocate for a Russia free from Putins control.
  Throughout his imprisonment, Navalny never lost his sense of optimism 
and hope for the future. He remained positive, even telling jokes in 
court less than 24 hours before his death.
  While in prison in the Arctic Circle, Navalny continued being a 
strong voice for freedom, relying on his family, lawyers, and other 
supporters to speak out on his behalf and stand defiant against Putins 
evil regime.
  He was a man of deep conviction who never faltered in his mission, no 
matter the cost.
  He was one of the bravest, most principled men I have ever met, and 
his memory will never be forgotten. The United States must continue 
Navalnys legacy and stand up against Putins efforts to trample 
freedom in Europe and around the world.
  May we never stop fighting to secure peace and democracy for all 
those who seek it, just as Navalny so courageously did.
HONORING THE ONEAL SCHOOL ON WINNING THEIR FIRST GIRLS BASKETBALL 
                           of north carolina
I rise today to congratulate the ONeal 
Schools varsity girls basketball team on winning their first ever 
state basketball title.
  Last month, for the first time in school history, the women of the 
ONeal School won the North Carolina Independent Schools Athletic 
Association (NCISAA) 2A basketball state championship. The Falcons won 
this years championship by a final score of 48-32 over Wayne County 
Day School. This victory caps off what was an incredible year for the 
Falcons, who finished the season with a 30-1 record. This is a 
momentous and well-deserved achievement.
  The coaches and players of the ONeal Schools girls basketball team 
have brought great pride to both their school and the whole of Moore 
County. I wish them all the best and hope to see them continue their 
great success next season. Go Falcons.
, please join me today in congratulating the coaches and 
athletes of the ONeal School on their victory in this seasons NCISAA 
2A basketball state championship.
I rise today to commemorate the 
distinguished career and public service of Police Chief John Kelley 
from the town of Vernon, Connecticut that is drawing to an honorable 
end on March 22, 2024. Chief Kelleys devotion to duty in the U.S. Army 
Reserve and the Vernon Police Department focused on defending our 
nation and ensuring public safety has always been about caring for and 
serving others. As a resident of Vernon for over forty years, I have 
had the privilege to personally witness the positive impact he has had 
on our town, which is deep and meaningful.
  A Vernon native, Chief Kelly grew up in a family whose patriarch 
Robert Kelley served in town fire service for 42 years, 21 of which as 
Fire Chief. I also knew Bob Kelley and worked with him on fire 
department issues during my time as town attorney and state 
representative. Bob was a true gentleman who led his department by 
example, a trait that his son followed, with great success. John Kelley 
attended Vernon schools and graduated from Rockville High School. After 
high school, he then enrolled at the University of Connecticut in 
Storrs, where he studied Criminal Justice and Sociology, which 
obviously signaled the direction he would follow later in life. After 
graduation his journey of public service began. He enlisted in the U.S. 
Army Reserve, where he honorably served for 6 years.
  Chief Kelley began his career in public safety when he was hired by 
his hometown police department on January 29, 1996. His diligent work 
resulted in a cascade of training awards and frequent promotions. He 
excelled in all aspects of his work. For example, he received the 
Samuel J. Luciano award for graduating first in his class and the TFC 
Allan J. Tuskowski award for overall excellence in training. In his 
career he took on a vast expanse of roles, including serving as a 
Patrol Division, a K-9 handler, Detective Sergeant, Lieutenant, and 
Captain of the Vernon Police Department, all before 2015. Additionally, 
he graduated from the FBI National Academy (273rd session) and the 
Command Training Series, Executive Development program at Roger 
Williams University.
  Given the respect and high regard he earned through the ranks of the 
Police department, he was the ideal candidate for Chief of Police upon 
the retirement of his predecessor, Chief James Kenny. As Chief, Kelley 
made major contributions to the improvement of the Police Department. 
He oversaw the implementation of technological advancements, the 
upgrade of body and dash cameras, upgraded duty handguns and rifles, 
formed a peer support team, and played a key role in the POSTC 
accreditation assessment. He was so proactive that the POSTC 
accreditation was accomplished over two years ahead of schedule. Chief 
Kelley uniquely understands the value of teamwork in public service. 
Most recently in his tenure, Chief Kelley implemented hundreds of 
thousands of COVID-19 Federal American Rescue Plan dollars in Vernon PD 
projects, increasing the towns emergency response capability and 
upgrading its technology.
  Not only did Chief Kelley dedicate immense portions of his time and 
effort to helping his town, but he also equipped these individuals with 
the tools and resources to help themselves in times of need. As Kelley 
put it himself, ``The Vernon Police Department is committed to 
excellence and the delivery of professional police services while 
providing its members with the equipment and training needed to 
successfully complete the mission. He educated many community members 
and in turn increased their self-sufficiency in moments of need. The 
impact of Chief Kelleys career will live on for many years after his 
departure. His legacy will instill a confident and prepared police 
force that will carry out its mission to foster a safe community that 
he and his family supported throughout many decades.
  Although John Kelley is retiring from his role as Police Chief on 
March 22, 2024, his involvement in the region will continue as he 
transitions to working as an armed school security officer in Ellington 
Public Schools on March 25. Not one to be idle, Mr. Kelley has allotted 
himself a mere three days of rest between retirement and the return to 
work. From his experience and education, one can easily see Chief 
Kelleys promising future as a school security officer. His pleasant 
demeanor and commitment to the wellbeing of other Vernon residents will 
surely inspire the future generations of Americans to follow in his 
footsteps. It will be an honor to continue to serve alongside John 
Kelley in his new role, protecting and educating Northeastern 
Connecticut students who benefit from his example of how to treat other 
individuals with respect and achieve academic success.
, it is an honor to recognize and immortalize the career 
and accomplishments of John Kelley. From the U.S. Army Reserve to the 
Vernon Police Department, to his future role as an armed school 
security officer in Ellington, Chief Kelley has always put his life on 
the line for the safety of others. He is a reliable and amiable 
individual whose devotion to his community shines through in every 
aspect of his being. One may hope that his humility and thoughtfulness 
are emulated by future generations of Americans. As Chief Kelley caps 
off 28 years of consummate service to Vernon, we should acknowledge his 
wife, Kellie, and daughters Grace and Abby. I ask my colleagues in the 
House to join me in commending and thanking John Kelley for his endless 
service to the United States.
I was necessarily absent from votes 
on Tuesday, March 19, 2024. Had I been present, I would have voted: Yea 
on Roll Call No. 87 and YEA on Roll Call No. 88.
I rise today to recognize Kelly Albrecht 
of Canon City for being inducted into the Fremont Hall of Fame.
  Throughout her distinguished 32-year career, Kelly has exemplified 
innovation in education. Over her tenure, Kelly taught fifth grade and 
elementary music and took on leadership roles, including serving as 
Canon Exploratory School middle school principal. After retiring, Kelly 
continued to shape the future of education in Fremont County as the 
Induction Coordinator and Teacher Development Coach for the Canon City 
School District. Her creative and innovative style of leadership has 
touched the lives of countless students and new teachers starting on 
their professional journeys.
  Kellys legacy is a testament to her passion for education and her 
impact on creating a culture of learning and excellence within the 
community.
  On behalf of the people of Colorados Seventh Congressional District, 
it is my honor to congratulate Kelly Albrecht for her accomplishment 
and thank her for her contribution to our community.
I rise today to honor the life of Mayor 
Olivia Trujillo, who passed away on March 3, 2024, surrounded by loved 
ones. She was 67 years old. Mayor Trujillo was born in Guadalajara, 
Mexico, and at the age of five, her family immigrated to Arvin, 
California. During her summers, she worked alongside her family 
harvesting fruits and vegetables in the fields of the San Joaquin 
Valley, learning the values of hard work and perseverance from a young 
age. Mayor

Trujillo attended Sierra Vista Elementary, Haven Drive Middle School, 
and Arvin High School, and was involved in numerous activities in the 
Arvin community during her childhood. Mayor Trujillo dedicated her life 
to serving the Arvin community for more than 60 years. She served as 
the Vice-President of the Arvin Chamber of Commerce from 2013 to 2018, 
Chair of the Arvin City Planning Commission from 2015 to 2018, and was 
a member of the Arvin City Council from 2016 to 2018. In 2020, she was 
elected as the Mayor of the City of Arvin. As the first woman, Latina, 
and immigrant in this position, her election represented a significant 
milestone in our communitys history. During her tenure, Mayor Trujillo 
was deeply committed to serving the communitys most vulnerable, 
including the youth, senior, and homeless populations. She was 
instrumental in bringing new jobs to the city, improving resources for 
the homeless population, and leading domestic violence awareness 
campaigns. She significantly expanded various services for Arvin 
residents, including the new Bakersfield College Arvin Campus, the 
first Urgent Care Center and food bank, and the Arvin Kiwanis Club for 
youth leadership development. Mayor Trujillo was a trailblazing leader, 
passionate about the well-being of all residents of the community. Mr. 
Speaker, I ask all my colleagues in the House of Representatives to 
join me in honoring the incredible life of Mayor Olivia Trujillo. Her 
service to the Arvin community will be felt for generations to come. My 
thoughts and prayers are with her family during this difficult time.
I rise today to recognize Susie Bell of 
Canon City for being inducted into the Fremont Hall of Fame.
  Susie was a pillar in Fremont County and spent decades improving the 
community before her passing in November of 2023. Her many 
philanthropic contributions and hours of volunteer work continue to 
have a transformative impact on students and so many others in Fremont 
County.
  Susie was committed to advancing education--she built several 
scholarships for current and future learners, supported early childhood 
development programs, and donated and volunteered for many events to 
promote the arts. Her tireless work and dedication to Fremont County 
did not go unnoticed. She will be missed, but her contributions will 
last for generations.
  On behalf of the people of Colorados Seventh Congressional District, 
it is my honor to congratulate Susie Bell for being inducted into 
Fremont Hall of Fame and thank her for her contribution and commitment 
to our community.
Title IV of Senate Resolution 4, agreed to by the Senate of February 
4, 1977, calls for establishment of a system for a computerized 
schedule of all meetings and hearings of Senate committees, 
subcommittees, joint committees, and committees of conference. This 
title requires all such committees to notify the Office of the Senate 
Daily Digest--designated by the Rules Committee--of the time, place and 
purpose of the meetings, when scheduled and any cancellations or 
changes in the meetings as they occur.
  As an additional procedure along with the computerization of this 
information, the Office of the Senate Daily Digest will prepare this 
information for printing in the Extensions of Remarks section of the 
Congressional Record on Monday and Wednesday of each week.
  Meetings scheduled for Thursday, March 21, 2024 may be found in the 
Daily Digest of todays Record.
I rise today to honor my good friend Deborah 
Kallick, who is retiring from her role as Vice President of Government 
and Industry Relations at Cedars-Sinai Health System after 24 years of 
service to our Southern California community.
  Deborah grew up in Beverly Hills, California, as a first-generation 
American, with her mother coming from Odesa, Ukraine, and her father 
from Munich, Germany. She earned her B.A. from Pitzer College in 1978 
and her M.B.A. from USC in 1983. Before joining Cedars-Sinai, she 
served as UCLAs Executive Director of Federal and Health Sciences 
Government Relations from 1985 to 2000.
  A dedicated advocate at all levels of government for the health care 
delivery system, Deborah has served as Cedars-Sinais legislative 
steward in Los Angeles, Sacramento, and Washington, D.C. Cedars-Sinai 
is a leading provider of care to Californians on Medi-Cal, the states 
Medicaid program, and Deborah has played a major role in expanding this 
program so that the most vulnerable in our community have access to 
health care services.
  Deborah led efforts to improve hospital financing and successfully 
advocated for funding to expand medical research and graduate medical 
education while playing a paramount role in establishing joint research 
efforts between Cedars-Sinai and the Uniform Services University at the 
Department of Defense. She was also instrumental in securing 
entitlements to build the new Cedars-Sinai Marina del Rey Hospital, 
contributing to the development of the institutions new campus. This 
initiative allowed Cedars-Sinai to expand its services and further its 
mission of education, research, and patient care.
  Beyond her work in the health care sphere, Deborah is also active in 
numerous civic and community organizations. She currently is the Board 
Vice President for Hillel International and the past Board Chair of USC 
Hillel and Hillel 818. Additionally, Deborah serves on the Boards of 
Directors of the Beverly Hills Chamber of Commerce, the Los Angeles 
Business Council, the West Hollywood Chamber of Commerce, Hillel 818, 
Hillel at the Claremont Colleges, Pitzer College, the Maple Counseling 
Center, and the Getty House Foundation.
  Deborah has received numerous accolades for her tireless service to 
our community. She received the West Hollywood Womens Leadership Award 
in 2006 and the Thomas Crail Lifetime Achievement Award from the 
Beverly Hills Chamber of Commerce in 2008. She also earned the 2006 
American Hospital Associations Grass Roots Champion Award and The 
Maple Counseling Centers Community Spirit Award in 2012.
  I am proud to have worked alongside Deborah to deliver better health 
outcomes to Southern Californians. Her tireless advocacy and relentless 
activism have had a profound impact on the lives of millions of 
patients--in Los Angeles, in California, and across the nation. Her 
presence as a stalwart of working toward enhancing health care access, 
quality, and affordability will be missed.
  I thank Deborah for a lifetime of service and wish her the best of 
luck in this next chapter of her life. I ask all Members to join me in 
congratulating Deborah for 24 years of service.