I rise today to celebrate Mr. Robert T. 
Scott as he is bestowed the prestigious title of President Emeritus of 
St. Josephs Collegiate Institute.
a religion teacher at St. Josephs 
Collegiate Institute in 1971. Over time, he served as a social studies 
teacher, vice principal, principal, and then president. In 2001, Mr. 
Scott earned his Letters of Affiliation, the highest honor bestowed by 
the Institute of Brothers of Christian Schools, the religious order 
that founded St. Josephs Collegiate Institute in 1861. Scott retired 
in 2017 after a tremendous 48-year career at the all-boys high school
  Throughout his career, Mr. Scott has exemplified the mission of St. 
Josephs Collegiate Institute, to transform the lives of students from 
diverse backgrounds through academic excellence and care for the whole 
person in a respectful, Lasallian Catholic community, developing each 
students unique talents in preparation for college and life. The 
students that Mr. Scott impacted throughout his tenure have excelled in 
their personal and professional lives in large part due to the 
mentorship and dedication of Mr. Scott.
  Today, Mr. Scott continues to inspire all who know him, sharing his 
compassion and dedication to his family, friends, country, and faith. 
Please join me in congratulating Mr. Robert T. Scott on an inspiring 
career in education, and the continuation of his commitment to 
education and the Lasallian tradition as President Emeritus of St. 
Josephs Collegiate Institute,
I rise to commemorate the life and legacy 
of a fallen hero and pillar of the Western New York community--Charles 
``Chuck Priore.
  Born in Buffalo, New York on December 15, 1975, Chuck was the 
youngest of three boys born to Charley and Laurie Priore. After 
graduating from Bishop Timon High School in 1994, Chuck entered the 
workforce and ultimately landed a job as a hazardous materials 
specialist with EarthTech.
  While working for EarthTech, Chuck traveled throughout the Midwest 
and Mid-Atlantic. In the weeks leading up to the September 11th terror 
attacks, Chuck and his co-workers were assigned to a job in Queens. 
When the attacks occurred, his team was redirected from their job site 
to the World Trade Center where they worked in 24-hour continuous 
shifts cleaning up debris from the fallen towers. His life and the 
lives of his future wife and children were forever changed by the time 
he spent doing his job, serving his country, and answering the call in 
the days following the attacks.
  In the months following, Chuck returned home to Buffalo and joined 
Laborers Union Local 210. In 2008, two years after the birth of his 
son, Kevin, he became a Corrections Officer with the Erie County 
Sheriffs Office and served in that role until 2021.
  In the fall of 2009, Chuck met his now-wife, Cate Flanagan, at the 
Buffalo Irish Center. They later moved into the same neighborhood that 
Chuck grew up in to start their lives together and raise a family. On 
June 25, 2020, during the COVID-19 pandemic, Chuck was diagnosed with 
bladder cancer linked to his time at the World Trade Center after the 
9/11 attacks. He underwent treatment and surgery but passed away on 
August 17, 2024, after being admitted to hospice care.
  Chucks passing leaves behind his beloved wife Cate, and two 
children, Kevin and Ciara who now face life without him. His sacrifice 
is a solemn reminder of the lasting impact of dedicated service in the 
face of tragedy. As we remember Charles ``Chuck Priore we grieve the 
loss of a beloved friend and dedicated public servant and find solace 
in knowing that his legacy lives on.
Constitution Day is a time set aside to 
commemorate the signing of the Constitution of the United States of 
America--the most important document in our Nations history.
  In 1787, the thirty-nine men that convened in Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania, forever altered history when they formed the supreme law 
of our land--written by the people, for the people.
  Through times of prosperity and times of hardship, our constitution 
has never wavered.
  Let this Constitution Day remind us of the liberty, justice, and 
freedom for all--and the never-ending pursuit of a more perfect union.
I rise today to recognize and 
congratulate Amit Elor for making history as the youngest American 
wrestler to earn an Olympic gold medal.
  Amit was born and raised in Walnut Creek, California and had been 
wrestling since age four. From a very young age, Amit has exemplified 
her astonishing skill and unwavering dedication to the sport. She 
attended College Park High School in Pleasant Hill, California where 
she earned the California high school state title in folkstyle 
wrestling. By the age of eighteen, Amit had won senior, U23, and U20 
world titles in the span of just three months, making her the youngest 
U.S. senior world champion in any discipline or gender. Amit retained 
these titles in 2023, making her the

only wrestler to win three titles two years in a row.
  In August, Amit won an Olympic gold medal in the womens freestyle 
68kg wrestling event. This historic victory made Amit the youngest 
wrestler from Team USA to ever win gold. Since 2019, Amit has 
accumulated 42 wins and outscored her opponents 375-19. We are eager to 
see her make history again in the 2028 Los Angeles Olympics.
  Our community is beyond proud of Amit and it has been a delight to 
root for her during this years Paris Olympics alongside Californias 
10th Congressional District. Please join me in congratulating Amit on 
her incredible accomplishments and the many more to come.
I rise to honor and remember the 
extraordinary life of Edward ``Ed D. Pettitt, Sr. Born on June 27, 
1961, in Newfane, NY. Ed was a man of deep conviction and unwavering 
principles. Raised on his familys farm, Eds early years were steeped 
in the values of hard work, independence, and a deep connection to the 
land. He was the beloved son of George and Marion Pettitt, who 
instilled in him a commitment to family and community that would guide 
him throughout his life,
  A brilliant student, Ed graduated as valedictorian from Newfane High 
School in 1980. He then attended the State University of New York at 
Buffalo, where he earned a Bachelor of Science in Mechanical 
Engineering, graduating magna cum laude in 1986. His love of learning 
led him to further his education, obtaining a Master of Science in 
1998, followed by a second Masters in Creative Studies from SUNY 
College at Buffalo in 2002.
  Eds professional career was marked by innovation and excellence. 
Over his 35-year tenure at Mahle (formerly Delphi Harrison Thermal 
Systems), he earned more than 20 patents and was inducted into the 
Delphi Automotive Systems Innovation Hall of Fame in 1997. His 
dedication to his work culminated in receiving the prestigious 2013 
``Boss Kettering Award, and he retired as a Product Engineering 
Manager in 2020.
  However, Eds legacy extends far beyond his professional 
achievements. He was a man deeply committed to First Principles 
Thinking--a philosophy that guided his approach to life, problem-
solving, and civic engagement. Ed believed in the importance of 
returning to fundamental truths and using them as a foundation to build 
solutions, a method that influenced both his engineering work and his 
advocacy.
  Central to Eds belief system was the conviction that natural 
rights--those to life, liberty, and property--originated not from any 
earthly government, but from our Creator. He held that these rights 
were inalienable and that governments were instituted among men to 
protect them, not to grant them. This belief fueled his passionate 
advocacy for the Second Amendment, as he viewed the right to keep and 
bear arms as a fundamental protection of these God-given rights. To 
safeguard these principles, Ed founded the Second Amendment For Ever 
(SAfE) organization in Niagara County. He was a staunch defender of the 
rights of responsible gun owners, believing that public safety and 
personal security were interdependent, both sustained by the 
individuals right to self-defense. Eds commitment to

this cause was rooted in his deepseated belief that the Second 
Amendment was essential to preserving all other freedoms.
  Ed also championed the rights of farmers and the agricultural 
community in Niagara County. Recognizing the challenges faced by rural 
areas under the current political system, he was a vocal advocate for 
Rural Electoral Equity. He argued that rural communities were 
politically disenfranchised, with power disproportionately concentrated 
in urban centers like New York City. Ed believed this imbalance 
undermined the principles of a republic, where all regions should have 
an equal voice in governance.
  His advocacy extended to challenging the 1964 Supreme Court ruling in 
``Reynolds v. Sims, which mandated that Senate districts be 
apportioned based on population rather than by county. Ed contended 
that this ruling led to political gerrymandering that favored urban 
areas at the expense of rural communities, affecting key issues such as 
gun control, energy, land use, and criminal justice.
  Eds vision was to make Niagara County a leading example of how rural 
areas could assert their rights and push back against state overreach. 
He worked tirelessly to build coalitions with other counties, 
strengthen local government, and create barriers to state infringement. 
As part of his efforts to support the agricultural community, Ed helped 
form the Niagara County Agricultural Rights Advisory Panel, ensuring 
that the voices of local farmers were heard and their rights protected. 
His contributions to the community were recognized through several 
awards, including the 2018 Ken Burner Memorial Award and the 2022 
Oliver Jones Memorial Award Sportsperson of the Year from the Niagara 
County Federation of Conservation Clubs, Inc.
  Above all, Ed was a devoted family man. He married his high school 
sweetheart, Lisa (Bowers) Pettitt, in 1981, and together they raised 
four sons: Edward II, Jonathon, Michael, and Thomas. He was a loving 
grandfather to five grandchildren, with whom he shared his love of the 
outdoors, including fishing, camping, kayaking, and farming.
  Edward D. Pettitt, Sr. will be remembered as a man of integrity, a 
fierce defender of constitutional rights, and a tireless advdcate for 
rural communities. His legacy lives on through his family, his 
community, and the many lives he touched with his unwavering commitment 
to freedom, justice, and the principles upon which this Nation was 
founded.
I rise today to honor Loyal Martin (Marty) 
Griffin Jr., MD, MPH who passed away on May 22, 2024, at the age of 
103. Marty was a trailblazing environmental leader, renowned for his 
early focus on the intersectionality of healthcare and the environment. 
He made profound impacts on both fields.
  Born in 1920 and raised in a mountain cabin along the Ogden River in 
Utah, Marty developed an appreciation of nature at an early age. His 
family moved to the West Coast during the Depression, eventually 
settling in Oakland, California where Marty was an Eagle Scout and the 
valedictorian of Oakland Technical High School. He earned a zoology 
degree from the University of California, Berkeley in 1942 and worked 
night shifts in the Richmond shipyards to afford Standford Medical 
School. After receiving his medical degree in 1946, Marty joined the 
United States Army Medical Corps and served as a captain during the end 
of World War II.
  Martys career in the medical profession quickly expanded to include 
environmental work, as he recognized the convergence of these two 
fields and their relationship to public health. He became a 
distinguished physician in Marin County, establishing the Ross Valley 
Clinic, Ross General Hospital, Tamalpais Retirement Center, and 
Kentfield Psychiatric Hospital. He also served as Chief of Medicine at 
both Marin General and Ross Hospitals.
  Marty returned to the University of California, Berkeley in 1972 
where he earned a masters degree in public health and subsequently 
became the Public Health Director of the Sonoma Developmental Center, a 
position he held for 15 years. In 1980, he was appointed Chief of the 
Hepatitis B, and later AIDS, Task Force for 11 state hospitals. In 
1989, he received the Gold Medal for Superior Medical Accomplishment 
from the State of California.
  Martys passion for land preservation and environmental education 
extended beyond his professional career. In 1961, he founded Audubon 
Canyon Ranch, which now includes 5,000 acres of wildlife sanctuaries 
throughout the Bay Area and Sonoma County and is a model of 
conservation education. This land created the ``gateway to the Point 
Reyes National Seashore and Golden Gate National Recreation Area that 
were later established in 1962 and 1972. Marty also cofounded the 
Environmental Forum of Marin, and he served as an elected official as a 
director of the Marin Municipal Water District. He created a model for 
watershed management plans through his founding of the Russian River 
Task Farce, Friends of the Russian River, and the Russian River 
Environmental Forum. Beyond California, Marty helped establish a 
20,000-acre preserve in Haleakala National Park and participated in 
wildlife efforts in Nepal.
  Martys lifetime of work inspired many, including the documentarians 
Nancy Kelly and Kenji Yamamoto who, in 2013, created the film Rebels 
with a Cause, detailing his and other local conservationists fight to 
stop development along the Marin County coastline. What would have been 
a large development is now public land enjoyed by thousands of visitors 
every year in the Golden Gate National Recreation Area. Known fondly as 
``the nature doctor and ``the doctor with mud on his shoes, Marty 
is survived by his wife, Joyce Griffin; daughters Linda Henke, Anne 
Oliver, Carol Griffin and Joanie Griffin; stepson Brian Nielsen; and 
five grandchildren. He is predeceased by his granddaughter, Gina Marin 
Monaco, who passed in 1998 at age 15 from leukemia.
, Martin Griffin was an innovative leader who never shied 
from an opportunity to advocate for our environment and the health of 
future generations. It was my privilege to know Marty and consider him 
a friend. His legacy in Marin County, California, and beyond cannot be 
understated. I respectfully ask that you join me in expressing my 
appreciation for his lifetime of good work.
I rise with Congressman Mike Thompson to 
honor Thomas Care Reed, who passed away at the age of 89 on February 
11, 2024, and his extensive public service to the United States and 
local Sonoma County community. Mr. Reed served as the 11th Secretary of 
the United States Air Force and was a dedicated public servant to three 
former Presidents.
, NY in 1934. His military career 
began as a member of Cornells Air Force Reserve Officer Training Corps 
program. He graduated with a Bachelor of Science in mechanical 
engineering as Cadet Colonel, the highest-ranking officer in his class. 
Shortly thereafter, he was commissioned as Second Lieutenant in the Air 
Force. Mr. Reed served until 1959, ending his active-duty career as 
Technical Project Manager for the Minuteman Re-Entry Vehicle System 
with the Air Forces Ballistic Missile Division.
  While enlisted in the Air Force, Mr. Reed simultaneously attended the 
University of Southern California where he completed his Masters 
Degree in electrical engineering. He later moved to the Bay Area where 
he was stationed at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory as a chief 
strategist working to develop new thermonuclear weapons systems. This 
work contributed to the end of the Cold War and launched his political 
career.
  As one of the key scientific minds behind the invention of 
thermonuclear devices being tested in the Pacific Ocean during the 
early 1960s, Mr. Reed earned the respect of his peers including 
Manhattan Project member Edward Teller. In 1973, he was appointed as 
Assistant to the Secretary of Defense. Just a few years later, under 
President Gerald Fords administration, Mr. Reed was named Secretary of 
the Air Force, a post he held until the beginning of President Carters 
term in 1977.
  Throughout his life, Mr. Reed held many passions including writing 
and winemaking. What started as a small hobby growing wine grapes in 
Sonoma Countys Alexander Valley would eventually transform into the 
renowned Clos du Bois Winery, which by the late 1980s, would sell more 
than 200,000 cases of wine per year.
, Kay, his daughter, Carolyn Reed 
Ellis, his sons, Gordon Reed and Andrew Reed, and six grandchildren. 
While his patriotism and military service were instrumental in 
deterring the Soviet Union from deploying nuclear devices during the 
Cold War, Mr. Reed will also be remembered as a loving husband, father, 
and grandfather.
, there is no doubt that Thomas Reed was a dedicated 
public servant who will be missed and whose many contributions to the 
Sonoma County region and Nation are worthy of commendation. Therefore, 
it is fitting and proper that we honor his many contributions and 
express our deep condolences to his family and friends.
today I introduce the ``Forest Legacy 
Management Flexibility Act. I thank my colleagues, Representatives 
Jared Huffman (D-CA), Jim Costa (D-CA), Ann M. Kuster (D-NH), and 
Suzanne Bonamici (D-OR) for cosponsoring my House bill.
  As the former Deputy Secretary of the Interior, I know our national 
conservation goals cannot be achieved through public land ownership 
alone. The federal and state governments can and must work with private 
landowners who want to do their part to conserve Americas natural 
landscapes, as my family did for our cattle ranch in 1998. This Act 
would unlock billions in federal funding to help states conserve 
working forestlands, create local jobs, and support sustainable forest 
management practices that reduce wildfire risk.
  The ``Forest Legacy Management Flexibility Act would allow States 
to choose to designate accredited, nonprofit land trusts to hold 
conservation easements purchased with federal funding under the U.S. 
Forest Services Forest Legacy Program. Current law requires that only 
the federal or state governments can hold conservation easements 
purchased under the Forest Legacy Program.
  Allowing States participating in the federal Forest Legacy Program 
the flexibility to partner with accredited, nonprofit land trusts will 
help permanently conserve more land by working with private landowners 
who want to have their land conserved but are wary of selling the 
federal or state governments an easement on their property. Expanding 
opportunities to conserve working forestlands will benefit our rural 
economies and encourage sustainable forest management practices that 
help prevent wildfires.
  This Act maintains the integrity of the Forest Legacy Program by 
holding all accredited, nonprofit land trusts participating in the 
Program to the highest possible standards. In addition, it implements 
safeguards to prevent misuse of the Program and allows the U.S. Forest 
Service or State to reclaim easements if a land trust falls into 
noncompliance with the Program.
  We will need every tool in the toolbox to advance the Biden-Harris 
Administrations ``America the Beautiful National Conservation Goal 
to conserve at least 30 percent of the lands and waters in the United 
States by 2030 and Governor Newsoms similar conservation goal for the 
State of California. This Act takes a critical step towards meeting 
these goals and protecting our countrys natural resources and forests 
for future generations.
  The ``Forest Legacy Management Flexibility Act would unlock new 
opportunities and funding for permanent land conservation. My 
colleagues and I are honored to introduce this legislation to preserve 
Americas working forests and bolster our rural economies. Mr. Speaker, 
I encourage all members to join us in cosponsoring this bill.
I rise today in celebration of the 
International Day of Democracy, which was Sunday, September 15. This 
day is an opportunity to promote the principles of democracy and 
freedom against an alarming resurgence of authoritarianism and 
fanaticism across the globe.
  The enemies of freedom seek to destabilize and destroy the 
constitutional democracies.
  It is estimated that in 2024 alone, two billion people across 64 
countries will have exercised their right to self-determination at the 
ballot box. But already, we have also witnessed sham elections, most 
notably in Bangladesh, Belarus, Venezuela and Russia, where the 
incumbent regimes suppressed political opposition and manipulated the 
electoral process.
  Free and fair elections are the cornerstone of democracy and the 
foundation of a free society. Yet, far too many dictators, budding 
autocrats and monarchists of the world have undermined the will of the 
people, using coups detat and electoral autocracy to stifle democratic 
voices. According to Freedom House, a leading American organization 
devoted to the support and defense of democracy around the world, in 
2023, political rights and civil liberties were diminished in 52 
countries, while just 21 countries made improvements.
  In June, I met Dr. Amir Khasru Chowdhury, a leader in the opposition 
Bangladesh Nationalist Party (BNP). Dr. Chowdhury was arrested on 
dubious charges three months before Bangladeshs January 2024 
elections. He languished in prison for six months until the Bangladeshi 
government, then controlled by Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina, 
conveniently released him two months after ballots had been cast. Dr. 
Chowdhury was not alone in his politically motivated imprisonment; his 
was one of nearly 8,000 arrests of BNP leaders and political 
dissidents. But despite the governments sinister ploy to subvert the 
electoral process, Dr. Chowdhury and the other jailed Bangladeshi 
dissidents were vindicated, and their cause ultimately prevailed. After 
a historic youth-led movement to end Prime Minister Hasinas despotic 
reign, the Bangladeshi people have earned the right to redirect their 
future. Its now time for the international community to support the 
fundamental principles of democratic governance in Bangladesh.
  Meantime in Hong Kong, the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) continues to 
erode the citys political independence. In July, a Hong Kong court 
taken over by the CCP denied a request to resume the trial of pro-
democracy activist Jimmy Lai. The case prosecuting Mr. Lai for what is 
essentially a ``thought crime lays bare the CCPs authoritarian 
takeover of the once-free Hong Kong. I was proud to adopt Jimmy Lai as 
a prisoner of conscience through the Tom Lantos Human Rights 
Commissions Defending Freedoms Project and will continue to 
passionately advocate for his release.
  Jimmy Lai is not the only prisoner of conscience detained by an 
autocratic regime. In July, I wrote a letter to President Biden and 
Secretary Blinken urging the administration to demand the release of 
those wrongfully imprisoned in Saudi Arabia for exercising their basic 
human rights. Thousands of courageous activists, journalists, religious 
clerics, and human rights defenders have been silenced for simply 
speaking out about their dreams for democracy--such as their desire to 
move freely, speak openly and wear whatever they choose. In response to 
their impassioned advocacy, the repressive Saudi Arabian regime has 
unjustly imprisoned critical voices, issued violent threats, and 
imposed severe travel bans. This draconian reign of terror must end 
immediately.
  The governments of Bahrain, Turkey, Belarus and numerous other 
nations are also holding prisoners of conscience hostage to suppress 
the voices of their fellow citizens. Our foreign policy must not 
overlook these human rights violations, be it governments subversion 
of electoral processes, obstruction of justice, or the crushing of 
dissent. I invite my colleagues to use their various platforms to 
support prisoners of conscience everywhere to tell their stories in the 
pursuit of justice. Joining the Defending Freedoms Project is one 
excellent avenue to do so.
  In 1835, Alexis de Tocqueville wrote that democracy and voting rights 
could shrink and shrivel away or grow and expand. Today, our world is 
embroiled in a period of democratic backsliding. In reverence to the 
International Day of Democracy, Im asking each of my colleagues to 
join me in boldly advocating for democracy and freedom across the 
world.
I rise today to recognize the Assyrian 
community in the Central Valley of California. In particular, 
Stanislaus County has had a long history of Assyrians seeking refuge 
from religious persecution and genocide in their ancestral homelands 
known as Mesopotamia. This vibrant and thriving community is determined 
to preserve the language, heritage, culture, and their identity as 
Christians.
  Over fifty thousand Assyrian Americans call Stanislaus County home. 
The 10th Anniversary of the Assyrian Festival hosted by the Assyrian 
Church of the East local parishes bring thousands of visitors to the 
Turlock Fairgrounds to celebrate the rich heritage, cuisine, and 
traditional dances of the Assyrian culture. The Assyrian language, 
heritage, and culture form the bedrock of Assyrian communities in the 
Central Valley, which anchors them in traditions that span millennia 
while also acting as guiding lights that propel them successfully 
forward while preserving their unique narrative. In addition, the 
Assyrian Church of the Easts most ancient faith dating back to the 
first century of Christianity offers this community spiritual 
nourishment. This heritage instills pride, and the language and culture 
fosters unity. Together, they empower the Assyrian people worldwide to 
preserve the rich legacy and advance as a vibrant community, forging 
connections across generations and continents, ensurIng their enduring 
presence in the tapestry of humanity.
  Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I ask my colleagues in the House to join me 
in proudly recognizing the Assyrian community in the Central Valley of 
California for its invaluable contributions to our Nations history, 
culture, and prosperity as we celebrate the 10th Anniversary of the 
Assyrian Festival this month.
I rise today to recognize the work of the 
Thompson Family Foundation for Autism and Neurodevelopment, which 
supports families with loved ones who have autism and other 
neurodevelopment conditions. Their multifaceted approach raises 
awareness, advances public policy, and spearheads philanthropic efforts 
for this amazing cause.
  The Thompson Foundation partners actively with the Lestonnac Free 
Clinic, located in the heart of Orange. The Lestonnac Clinic shares the 
same philanthropic vision as the Thompson Foundation, and their 
contributions have

positively impacted the health and well-being of many of our low-income 
residents.
  Since the Foundations inception nearly two decades ago, founders 
Billy and Nancy Thompson have fostered an environment that places 
families and their concerns first. To date, the Thompson Family 
Foundation has helped conduct over 5,000 autism spectrum disorder 
diagnostic evaluations through the Thompson Center for Autism &amp; 
Neurodevelopment at the University of Missouri.
  In addition, the foundation contrIbutes equipment, like that used for 
cardiac and vision screening, and has recently led the expansion of 
patient examination rooms at the Lestonnac Clinic. The Foundation is 
currently funding efforts to open the Nations first dedicated free 
surgery center, which would allow uninsured community members to 
receive non-life-threatening surgery procedures, like hernia repairs or 
colonoscopies, that are often neglected.
  Providing quality health services to our community is critical--and 
through the Thompson Familys involvement and leadership, the Lestonnac 
Clinic will be able to continue providing essential preventative care 
to their patients.
  Id like to thank Billy and Nancy, important leaders in our Orange 
County community who have demonstrated their commitment to caring for 
our children and families. The work of the Thompson Family Foundation 
continues to be an important cornerstone of support for healthcare 
services to our districts low-income and uninsured residents, and I 
join our community in thanking them for the great work they do.
Title IV of Senate Resolution 4, agreed to by the Senate of February 
4, 1977, calls for establishment of a system for a computerized 
schedule of all meetings and hearings of Senate committees, 
subcommittees, joint committees, and committees of conference. This 
title requires all such committees to notify the Office of the Senate 
Daily Digest--designated by the Rules Committee--of the time, place and 
purpose of the meetings, when scheduled and any cancellations or 
changes in the meetings as they occur.
  As an additional procedure along with the computerization of this 
information, the Office of the Senate Daily Digest will prepare this 
information for printing in the Extensions of Remarks section of the 
Congressional Record on Monday and Wednesday of each week.
  Meetings scheduled for Tuesday, September 17, 2024 may be found in 
the Daily Digest of todays Record.

     10 a.m.
       Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation
         To hold hearings to examine aviation cybersecurity 
           threats.
                                                            SR-253
       Committee on Environment and Public Works
         To hold hearings to examine Americas regional 
           commissions, focusing on sharing best practices in 
           regional and economic development.
                                                            SD-406
       Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
         Business meeting to continue to consider S. 4667, to 
           amend title 31, United States Code, to establish the 
           Life Sciences Research Security Board, S. 4373, to 
           provide for congressional approval of national 
           emergency declarations, S. 4495, to enable safe, 
           responsible, and agile procurement, development, and 
           use of artificial intelligence by the Federal 
           Government, S. 4675, to require the United States 
           Postal Service to submit a comprehensive proposal to 
           the Postal Regulatory Commission before implementing 
           any network changes, S. 4630, to establish an 
           interagency committee to harmonize regulatory regimes 
           in the United States relating to cybersecurity, S. 
           4654, to amend the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief 
           and Emergency Assistance Act to allow Indian tribal 
           governments to directly request fire management 
           assistance declarations and grants, S. 4698, to 
           authorize the Joint Task Forces of the Department of 
           Homeland Security, S. 4711, to limit the consideration 
           of marijuana use when making an employment suitability 
           or security clearance determination, S. 4681, to ensure 
           a timely, fair, meaningful, and transparent process for 
           individuals to seek redress because they were wrongly 
           identified as a threat under the screening and 
           inspection regimes used by the Department of Homeland 
           Security, to require a report on the effectiveness of 
           enhanced screening programs of the Department of 
           Homeland Security, S. 4043, to amend title 5, United 
           States Code, to make executive agency telework policies 
           transparent, to track executive agency use of telework, 
           S. 4679, to amend title XLI of the FAST Act to improve 
           the Federal permitting process, S. 4716, to amend 
           section 7504 of title 31, United States Code, to 
           improve the single audit requirements, S. 4294, to 
           direct the Secretary of Homeland Security to negotiate 
           with the Government of Canada regarding an agreement 
           for integrated cross border aerial law enforcement 
           operations, S. 59, to implement merit-based reforms to 
           the civil service hiring system that replace degree-
           based hiring with skills-and competency-based hiring, 
           S. 4676, to enhance the effectiveness of the Shadow 
           Wolves Program, S. 4672, to require the Commissioner 
           for U.S. Customs and Border Protection to assess 
           current efforts to respond to hazardous weather and 
           water events at or near United States borders and, to 
           the extent such efforts may be improved, to develop a 
           hazardous weather and water events preparedness and 
           response strategy, S. 4697, to enhance the 
           cybersecurity of the Healthcare and Public Health 
           Sector, S. 4715, to require the National Cyber Director 
           to submit to Congress a plan to establish an institute 
           within the Federal Government to serve as a centralized 
           resource and training center for Federal cyber 
           workforce development, S. 4631, to amend title 41, 
           United States Code, to prohibit minimum education 
           requirements for proposed contractor personnel in 
           certain contract solicitations, S. 4700, to modify the 
           governmentwide financial management plan, S. 4656, to 
           amend title 5, United States Code, concerning 
           restrictions on the participation of certain Federal 
           employees in partisan political activity, S. 4651, to 
           require agencies to use information and communications 
           technology products obtained from original equipment 
           manufacturers or authorized resellers, S. 4419, to 
           require the Science and Technology Directorate in the 
           Department of Homeland Security to develop greater 
           capacity to detect, identify, and disrupt illicit 
           substances in very low concentrations, S. 4321, to 
           amend title 5, United States Code, to prohibit the 
           payment of annuities and retired pay to individuals 
           convicted of certain sex crimes, S. 2546, to designate 
           the facility of the United States Postal Service 
           located at 100 North Taylor Lane in Patagonia, Arizona, 
           as the ``Jim Kolbe Memorial Post Office, S. 3946, to 
           designate the facility of the United States Postal 
           Service located at 1106 Main Street in Bastrop, Texas, 
           as the ``Sergeant Major Billy D. Waugh Post Office, 
           S. 4077, to designate the facility of the United States 
           Postal Service located at 180 Steuart Street in San 
           Francisco, California, as the ``Dianne Feinstein Post 
           Office, H.R. 5527, to amend section 1078 of the 
           National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2018 
           to increase the effectiveness of the Technology 
           Modernization Fund, H.R. 7219, to ensure that Federal 
           agencies rely on the best reasonably available 
           scientific, technical, demographic, economic, and 
           statistical information and evidence to develop, issue 
           or inform the public of the nature and bases of Federal 
           agency rules and guidance, H.R. 7524, to amend title 
           40, United States Code, to require the submission of 
           reports on certain information technology services 
           funds to Congress before expenditures may be made, H.R. 
           3254, to amend the Homeland Security Act of 2002 to 
           establish a process to review applications for certain 
           grants to purchase equipment or systems that do not 
           meet or exceed any applicable national voluntary 
           consensus standards, H.R. 6174, to improve the 
           biodetection functions of the Department of Homeland 
           Security, H.R. 272, to amend title 31, United States 
           Code, to authorize transportation for Government 
           astronauts returning from space between their residence 
           and various locations, H.R. 4403, to amend the Homeland 
           Security Act of 2002 to make improvements to the 
           Securing the Cities program, H.R. 5887, to amend 
           chapter 3 of title 5, United States Code, to improve 
           Government service delivery,

           and build related capacity for the Federal Government, 
           H.R. 7525, to require the Director of the Office of 
           Management and Budget to issue guidance to agencies 
           requiring special districts to be recognized as local 
           government for the purpose of Federal financial 
           assistance determinations, H.R. 4467, to direct the 
           Under Secretary for Management of the Department of 
           Homeland Security to assess contracts for covered 
           services performed by contractor personnel along the 
           United States land border with Mexico, H.R. 599, to 
           designate the facility of the United States Postal 
           Service located at 3500 West 6th Street, Suite 103 in 
           Los Angeles, California, as the ``Dosan Ahn Chang Ho 
           Post Office, H.R. 1060, to designate the facility of 
           the United States Postal Service located at 1663 East 
           Date Place in San Bernardino, California, as the ``Dr. 
           Margaret B. Hill Post Office Building, H.R. 1098, to 
           designate the facility of the United States Postal 
           Service located at 50 East Derry Road in East Derry, 
           New Hampshire, as the ``Chief Edward B. Garone Post 
           Office, H.R. 1555, to designate the facility of the 
           United States Postal Service located at 2300 Sylvan 
           Avenue in Modesto, California, as the ``Corporal 
           Michael D. Anderson Jr. Post Office Building, H.R. 
           3608, to designate the facility of the United States 
           Postal Service located at 28081 Marguerite Parkway in 
           Mission Viejo, California, as the ``Major Megan McClung 
           Post Office Building, H.R. 3728, to designate the 
           facility of the United States Postal Service located at 
           25 Dorchester Avenue, Room 1, in Boston, Massachusetts, 
           as the ``Caroline Chang Post Office, H.R. 5476, to 
           designate the facility of the United States Postal 
           Service located at 1077 River Road, Suite 1, in 
           Washington Crossing, Pennsylvania, as the ``Susan C. 
           Barnhart Post Office, H.R. 5640, to designate the 
           facility of the United States Postal Service located at 
           12804 Chillicothe Road in Chesterland, Ohio, as the 
           ``Sgt. Wolfgang Kyle Weninger Post Office Building, 
           H.R. 5712, to designate the facility of the United 
           States Postal Service located at 220 Fremont Street in 
           Kiel, Wisconsin, as the ``Trooper Trevor J. Casper Post 
           Office Building, H.R. 5985, to designate the facility 
           of the United States Postal Service located at 517 
           Seagaze Drive in Oceanside, California, as the 
           ``Charlesetta Reece Allen Post Office Building, H.R. 
           6073, to designate the facility of the United States 
           Postal Service located at 9925 Bustleton Avenue in 
           Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, as the ``Sergeant 
           Christopher David Fitzgerald Post Office Building, 
           H.R. 6651, to designate the facility of the United 
           States Postal Service located at 603 West 3rd Street in 
           Necedah, Wisconsin, as the ``Sergeant Kenneth E. Murphy 
           Post Office Building, H.R. 7192, to designate the 
           facility of the United States Postal Service located at 
           333 West Broadway in Anaheim, California, as the ``Dr. 
           William I. `Bill Kott Post Office Building, H.R. 
           7199, to designate the facility of the United States 
           Postal Service located at S74w16860 Janesville Road, in 
           Muskego, Wisconsin, as the ``Colonel Hans Christian Heg 
           Post Office, H.R. 7423, to designate the facility of 
           the United States Postal Service located at 103 
           Benedette Street in Rayville, Louisiana, as the ``Luke 
           Letlow Post Office Building, and the nominations of 
           Sherri Malloy Beatty-Arthur, Rahkel Bouchet, Erin 
           Camille Johnston, Ray D. McKenzie, and John Cuong 
           Truong, each to be an Associate Judge of the Superior 
           Court of the District of Columbia, Ann C. Fisher, of 
           South Dakota, and Ashley Jay Elizabeth Poling, of North 
           Carolina, both to be a Commissioner of the Postal 
           Regulatory Commission, and Carmen G. Iguina Gonzalez, 
           and Joseph Russell Palmore, both to be an Associate 
           Judge of the District of Columbia Court of Appeals.
                                                            SD-342
       Committee on Indian Affairs
         Business meeting to consider S. 2695, to amend the Indian 
           Law Enforcement Reform Act to provide for advancements 
           in public safety services to Indian communities, S. 
           3857, to take certain land in the State of California 
           into trust for the benefit of the Jamul Indian Village 
           of California, S. 4442, to amend the Crow Tribe Water 
           Rights Settlement Act of 2010 to make improvements to 
           that Act, and S. 4505, to approve the settlement of 
           water rights claims of Ohkay Owingeh in the Rio Chama 
           Stream System, to restore the Bosque on Pueblo Land in 
           the State of New Mexico; to be immediately followed by 
           a hearing to examine the nomination of Patrice H. 
           Kunesh, of Minnesota, to be Chairman of the National 
           Indian Gaming Commission.
                                                            SD-628
     2 p.m.
       Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry
       Subcommittee on Food and Nutrition, Specialty Crops, 
           Organics, and Research
         To hold hearings to examine keeping kids learning in the 
           National School Lunch Program and School Breakfast 
           Program.
                                                            SD-562
       Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs
       Subcommittee on Economic Policy
         To hold hearings to examine the macroeconomic impacts of 
           potential tax reform in 2025.
                                                            SD-538
       Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe
         To hold hearings to examine Russias imperial identity.
                                                        2358C-RHOB

     2:30 p.m.
       Committee on Small Business and Entrepreneurship
         To hold hearings to examine streamlining and coordinating 
           support for rural small businesses.
                                                           SR-428A
       Select Committee on Intelligence
         To hold hearings to examine foreign threats to elections 
           in 2024, focusing on roles and responsibilities of U.S. 
           tech providers.
                                                            SH-216
     3 p.m.
       Committee on Veterans Affairs
         To hold hearings to examine current and future VA budget 
           challenges, focusing on providing for veterans.
                                                            SR-418

     10 a.m.
       Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation
       Subcommittee on Oceans, Fisheries, Climate Change, and 
           Manufacturing
         To hold hearings to examine Coast Guard drug interdiction 
           and enforcement in the maritime environment.
                                                            SR-253
       Committee on Energy and Natural Resources
         To hold hearings to examine fusion energy technology 
           development and commercialization efforts.
                                                            SD-366
       Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions
         Business meeting to consider an original resolution 
           directing the Senate Legal Counsel to bring a civil 
           action to enforce a subpoena of the Committee on 
           Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions of the Senate, 
           an original resolution authorizing the President of the 
           Senate to certify the report of the Committee on 
           Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions of the Senate 
           regarding the refusal of Dr. Ralph de la Torre to 
           appear and testify before the Committee, and other 
           pending calendar business.
                                                            SD-562
       Committee on the Judiciary
         Business meeting to consider S. 1306, to reauthorize the 
           COPS ON THE BEAT grant program, S. 2220, to amend title 
           35, United States Code, to invest in inventors in the 
           United States, maintain the United States as the 
           leading innovation economy in the world, and protect 
           the property rights of the inventors that grow the 
           economy of the United States, S. 2140, to amend title 
           35, United States Code, to address matters relating to 
           patent subject matter eligibility, S. 4713, to amend 
           chapter 11 of title 35, United States Code, to require 
           the voluntary collection of demographic information for 
           patent inventors, S. 2082, to make technical 
           corrections relating to the Justice Against Sponsors of 
           Terrorism Act, and the nominations of Ryan Young Park, 
           of North Carolina, to be United States Circuit Judge 
           for the Fourth Circuit, Byron B. Conway, to be United 
           States District Judge for the Eastern District of 
           Wisconsin, Jonathan E. Hawley, to be United States 
           District Judge for the Central District of Illinois, 
           April M. Perry, to be United States District Judge for 
           the Northern District of Illinois, Gail A. Weilheimer, 
           to be United States District Judge for the Eastern 
           District of Pennsylvania, and Joseph R. Adams, to be 
           United States Marshal for the Northern District of West 
           Virginia, David L. Lemmon II, to be United States 
           Marshal for the Southern District of West Virginia, and 
           Bobby Jack Woods, to be United States Marshal for the 
           Eastern District of Kentucky, all of the Department of 
           Justice.
                                                            SD-G50
       Special Committee on Aging
         To hold hearings to examine how scammers are stealing 
           from older adults, focusing on fighting fraud.
                                                            SD-106
     10:30 a.m.
       Committee on Foreign Relations
         To hold hearings to examine the nominations of John W. 
           McIntyre, of Texas, to be Ambassador to the Kingdom of 
           Eswatini, Jeremey Neitzke, of Illinois, to be 
           Ambassador to the Kingdom of

           Lesotho, Abigail L. Dressel, of Connecticut, to be 
           Ambassador to the Republic of Angola, and to serve 
           concurrently and without additional compensation as 
           Ambassador to the Democratic Republic of Sao Tome and 
           Principe, James Holtsnider, of Iowa, to be Ambassador 
           to the Independent State of Samoa, Brian K. Stimmler, 
           of Nebraska, to be Ambassador to the Kyrgyz Republic, 
           and Amanda S. Jacobsen, of Washington, to be Ambassador 
           to the Republic of Equatorial Guinea, all of the 
           Department of State.
                                                            SD-419

     10 a.m.
       Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions
         To hold hearings to examine Novo Nordisks high prices 
           for Ozempic and Wegovy for patients with diabetes and 
           obesity.
                                                            SD-562

     10 a.m.
       Committee on Foreign Relations
         Business meeting to consider S. 4425, to support 
           democracy and the rule of law in Georgia, H.R. 8282, to 
           impose sanctions with respect to the International 
           Criminal Court engaged in any effort to investigate, 
           arrest, detain, or prosecute any protected person of 
           the United States and its allies, and the nominations 
           of Vivek Hallegere Murthy, of Florida, to be 
           Representative of the United States on the Executive 
           Board of the World Health Organization, Kristen Sarri, 
           of Maryland, to be Assistant Secretary for Oceans and 
           International Environmental and Scientific Affairs, 
           John N. Nkengasong, of Georgia, to be Ambassador-At-
           Large for Global Health Security and Diplomacy, 
           Elizabeth K. Horst, of Minnesota, to be Ambassador to 
           the Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka, Troy 
           Fitrell, of Virginia, to be Ambassador to the Republic 
           of Seychelles, Kelly Adams-Smith, of New Jersey, to be 
           Ambassador to the Republic of Moldova, Juan Carlos 
           Iturregui, of Maryland, to be Ambassador to the 
           Dominican Republic, Jennifer D. Gavito, of Colorado, to 
           be Ambassador to the State of Libya, Tracey Ann 
           Jacobson, of Virginia, to be Ambassador to the Republic 
           of Iraq, Joshua M. Harris, of Maryland, to be 
           Ambassador to the Peoples Democratic Republic of 
           Algeria, and Peter W. Lord, of Florida, to be 
           Ambassador to the Republic of Senegal, and to serve 
           concurrently and without additional compensation as 
           Ambassador to the Republic of Guinea-Bissau, all of the 
           Department of State.
                                                             S-116
     2 p.m.
       Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
       Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations
         To hold hearings to examine FAA oversight of Boeings 
           broken safety culture.
                                                            SD-342