I rise today to celebrate the mens volleyball 
team from the University of California, Los Angeles. They took home the 
2024 NCAA Mens National Collegiate Volleyball Championship on the 4th 
of May. UCLA defeated the mens volleyball team from the California 
State University, Long Beach at Walter Pyramid on the campus of Long 
Beach State in Long Beach, California.
  This years championship brought home the teams 21st national title 
win, cementing their record as the winningest program in NCAA history. 
The win marks UCLAs 122nd overall NCAA title across all sports. These 
are truly remarkable achievements.
  The mens volleyball team should be proud of their achievement in 
earning the distinction of being back-to-back national champions, 
amongst the more than half a million student-athletes who participate 
in NCAA events each year. With guidance from Coach John Speraw, who 
secured his fifth NCAA mens volleyball title as a collegiate head 
coach, UCLA ended their season with wins in 15 out of their last 16 
matches.
  I would like to sincerely congratulate the UCLAs mens volleyball 
team once again on winning its second consecutive national championship 
and wish them the best of luck next season. This win is a special 
moment in the collegiate athletic careers of each player and marks an 
exceptional accomplishment and historical achievement for the UCLA 
community. Go Bruins. U-C-L-A. Fight. Fight. Fight.
I rise to recognize and congratulate 
Shiloh Baptist Church Old Site on 170 years of service to the 
community.

  This remarkable milestone is a testament to the thousands of 
congregants who, through their unwavering faith and love for their 
neighbors, have helped build a legacy of service at the church.
  For 170 years, Shiloh Old Site has been an advocate for justice, 
equality, and perseverance. Throughout the years, this community has 
been a catalyst in halting the spread of racial injustice in the city 
of Fredericksburg and has worked tirelessly to provide supplemental 
education to Black residents to offset the shortfalls of a racially 
segregated educational system. Through its ministries and its purpose-
driven youth mission, the church works to provide families and children 
with programming that nurtures a community service mindset.
  Shiloh Old Site is a pillar of the Fredericksburg community--always 
ready to lend a helping hand to those in need. The communitys 
commitment to Fredericksburg and its residents is both inspiring and 
humbling.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in congratulating and 
thanking Shiloh Baptist Church Old Site on 170 years of dedicated 
service to the Fredericksburg community. I look forward to celebrating 
their continued success and contributions to Virginia in years to come.
due to flight delays caused by 
storms in my home state of Louisiana, I was unable to be present for 
votes on May 14, 2024.
  Had I been present, I would have voted YEA on Roll Call No. 196, and 
YEA Roll Call No. 197.
RECOGNIZING BERNIE RICKES LEADERSHIP OF UAW LOCAL 600 IN DEARBORN, 
                              of michigan
I rise today to recognize Bernie Ricke, 
President of UAW Local 600 in Dearborn, Michigan, on the occasion of 
his retirement. His dedication to the UAW over the last 51 years, and 
his leadership of Local 600 for the past 15 years, is worthy of 
commendation.
  UAW Local 600 currently has over 30,000 active and retired members, 
representing a diverse membership from the Ford Rouge Complex, AK 
Steel, truck drivers, independent part suppliers, as well as healthcare 
and technical office professionals. They currently have over 47 
autonomous bargaining units throughout Southeastern Michigan.
  Bernie was born into the auto industry as the son of an engineer who 
worked at Ford, General Motors, and Chrysler. At the age of 18, Bernie 
took a job in a Ford warehouse and shortly thereafter joined the UAW as 
a member of Local 600 in November of 1973. He quickly took on more 
roles within the union, holding positions of Financial Secretary, 
District Committee-person, Bargaining Committee-person, and Vice 
President of the Parts Depot Unit. From 1997 he served as the Second 
and First Vice President of Local 600 before being elected President in 
2009. His leadership over the last 15 years has earned him the respect 
of not only local leaders but national leaders as well. UAW VP Chuck 
Browning said about Bernie ``Hes unselfish, Hes humble. And hes a 
really powerful presence in our union. Rory Gamble, the former 
president of the UAW, said ``Bernies leadership legacy will fare well 
over the years as historians look back at his impact on the UAW and 
Ford. He was steady, fair, and successful for members in the worst of 
times. If the measure of a man is the dignity he brings to others, he 
will always be a giant in our union.
  Bernie and I got to know each other through the many community 
projects that he has dedicated himself to. Outside of his work with the 
UAW, Bernie and his wife, Sue, are pillars of the Detroit community. 
Together they run the Bernie Ricke Charity Fund out of Trenton, MI. 
Bernie is a lifetime member of the NAACP, member of the Labor Advisory 
Board for Health Alliance Plan, and serves as the Chairman of the Board 
of Directors for Bridging Communities Incorporated. Bridging 
Communities is a non-profit organization that serves the community of 
Southwest Detroit by providing a variety of services to the homebound 
elderly including meals on wheels, minor home repairs, transportation 
for doctors appointments and medical care. In 1999 and again in 2004, 
Bernie was given the ``Spirit of Detroit award by the Detroit City 
Council.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in honoring Bernie Ricke 
for all that he has done for the people of Southeastern Michigan. 
Together we have been through the thick and thin of life, surviving the 
tough times by breaking bread at his famous garage parties. We wish him 
all best in retirement, though we know he will still be working hard to 
support the UAW and his Detroit community in whatever ways he can. I 
thank Bernie.
I rise today to recognize Boricua College 
on the special occasion of its 50th aniversary and in appreciation for 
decades of higher education. Boricua College was the first private, 
not-for-profit post-secondary educational institution established in 
the United States specifically designed to meet the academic needs of 
Puerto Ricans and other Spanish-speaking people. Today, it is a diverse 
institution for learning and professional development.
  Boricua College inspired educated and passionate advocates for the 
Puerto Rican Disapora during the 1960s and 70s in New York City. 
Visionaries like Dr. Antonia Pantoja, founder of Universidad Boricua 
and the precursor of Boricua College, founded by Dr. Victor Alicea, 
believed that higher education and cultural pride were crucial to 
addressing poverty and creating economic empowerment. The significant 
migration of Puerto Ricans to New York City warranted a grassroots 
response to navigate the socio-economic opportunities and challenges of 
plantando bandera in a new environment. Thus, Boricua College was 
created and became a beacon of hope for the Latino community in 
Brooklyn.
  Since its founding in 1974, Boricua College has grown from its humble 
beginnings on a single-floor storefront in Williamsburg to a multi-
campus institution spanning Brooklyn, Manhattan, and the Bronx. The 
first Boricua College class had just 26 students. When it opened its 
doors, it broke all barriers to higher learning with a cadre of Puerto 
Rican bilingual professionals in New York City. Today, Boricua College 
has an enrollment of thousands of students pursuing an Associate, 
Bachelor or Masters degree in the field of Human Services, Business, 
Liberal Arts, Childhood Education and inter-American Studies to list a 
few. It is also a designated Hispanic Serving Institution by the U.S. 
Department of Education.
  The growth of Boricua College exemplifies the growth of Latinos 
economic and political empowerment across the country. The college may 
not have millions in endowments, if at all. However, it does have an 
unwavering commitment to educational advancement. By 2060, nearly 1 in 
4 Americans are likely to be Latinos. Thanks to vital institutions 
like Boricua College, we are making even greater contributions in every 
sector of society--education, politics, business, the arts, and 
sciences.
  This fine institution is as successful as the administration and 
leadership. Therefore, I would also like to salute Founder and 
President Dr. Victor G. Alicea for a lifetime of public service, Board 
of Trustees Chair Benito R. Fernandez, the deans, faculty, staff, and 
graduates. Mr. Speaker, please join us in recognizing Boricua College 
on the occasion of its 50th anniversary and offering our best wishes 
for another 50 years of serving the community.
I rise today to recognize Cait Owen for 
earning the Arvada Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth Award.
  Cait has overcome many challenges along her journey to success, 
demonstrating perseverance at every step. Students who strive to make 
the most of their education, like Cait, develop crucial skills and a 
work ethic that will guide them for the rest of their lives. This award 
is a testament to Caits hard work, determination, and perseverance at 
Ralston Valley High School and is clearly just the beginning of a 
bright and promising future.
  It is my honor to congratulate Cait Owen on achieving the Arvada 
Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth Award.
I rise today to recognize Mr. Mark Kipphut 
of McLendon-Chisholm, Texas, and present him with the Congressional 
Patriot Award. Mark has dedicated himself to faithfully serving our 
community and country.
  After graduating from The Citadel with a political science degree in 
May 1979, Mark commissioned into the United States Air Force. He served 
as a Command Intelligence Officer during the Gulf War and Global War on 
Terrorism for many years. In his last assignment, Mark became the 
Director of Intelligence for the Pacific Air Forces at Hickam Air Force 
Base. He later received a masters degree in management from Embry-
Riddle University.
  When he retired from the military as a Colonel, Mark served as the 
Director of Strategy for Raytheon Missile Systems in Tucson, Arizona. 
In 2010, he and his family moved to Texas, where he became the Program 
Director of Tactical Intelligence Systems for Raytheon. In this role, 
Mark oversaw hundreds of millions of dollars in annual sales and 
government contracting. He currently works as a Senior Advisor for BCE 
Consulting, in which he focuses on enhancing our operational 
capabilities to defend against cyber and unmanned threats. In addition 
to protecting our national security, Mark is passionate about giving 
back to his community and supporting our veterans. He is the Commander 
of the Rockwall Terry Fisher American Legion Post, where he created 
college scholarships for the children of veterans. Moreover, Mark 
organizes annual trips for students to attend the Youth Leadership 
Conferences. I am proud of Marks contributions to our community, and I 
am sure he will continue to make a positive impact on the world around 
us for many years to come.
  It is an honor to bestow Mark with the Patriot Award for his 
exceptional service to our Nation and the people of North Texas.
I rise today to recognize Mr. Quint 
Avenetti, of Rockwall, Texas, and present him with the Congressional 
Patriot Award. Quint has dedicated himself to faithfully serving our 
community and country.
  Quint was born in Hayden, Arizona, in 1962. He enlisted in the United 
States Marine Corps in 1980 and participated in active service for 
nearly three decades. From providing security to several U.S. Embassies 
around the world to being deployed during the Gulf War and Global War 
on Terrorism, Quint served with distinction and merit. He specialized 
in Joint Targeting, Geodesy, Counterfire Radar, Artillery Operations, 
and Fire Support. As a result of his exceptional leadership and 
expertise, Quint achieved the rank of Chief Warrant Officer 5.
  After retiring from the military in March 2008, Quint moved to 
Rockwall with his family. He currently serves as the Vice President of 
the Combat Systems Sector for Navmar Applied Science Corp. In this 
role, Quint works diligently to train the next generation of Marine 
Joint Fire Observers, enhance security at diplomatic locations for the 
State Department, and develop unmanned aircraft technology. In addition 
to his work in protecting our national security, he serves on the 
Advisory Board for Veterans Mortgage of America to help veterans 
succeed in home ownership. Quint is the Commandant of the CWO2 James 
Randolph Detachment of the Marine Corps League and is involved with 
many veterans advocacy organizations. He also serves as a mentor to 
Eagle Scouts and was the previous Scoutmaster of Rockwall Troop 989. I 
am proud of Quints contributions to our community, and I am sure he 
will continue to make a positive impact on the world around us for many 
years to come.
  It is an honor to bestow Quint with the Patriot Award for his 
exceptional service to our Nation and the people of North Texas.
today I would like to recognize the City 
Manager of Garden City Dale ``Doc Dougherty for his diligent service 
to the people of Garden City community since 2018.
  Born and raised in Allentown, Pennsylvania, Mr. Doughtery has 
extensive experience in public administration. He carries a bachelors 
degree in health care management from Kings College, a masters degree 
in Sports Management from the United States Sports Academy, and a 
Master of Business Administration from the University of Notre Dame. 
Furthermore, Mr. Doughtery has obtained the highest certification in 
city management and the highest credential in the parks and recreation 
industry. He began his career as the Director of Community Affairs with 
the Town of

Lake Park, Florida and has since led four different organizations 
during times of great change. Mr. Doughtery has demonstrated his 
skillful leadership by creating, producing, and managing hundreds of 
major events, including a major national sporting event.
  In Garden City, Mr. Doughtery personally managed the reconstruction 
and renovation of the 60-year-old city hall, the fire station, and a 
78,000-square-foot community center. He has demonstrated his dedication 
to promoting the best quality of life for Garden City residents by 
implementing countless new and improved policies and City Ordinances. 
Doc Doughtery has worked tirelessly to uplift the people of Garden 
City. We are grateful for his many years of service to our community 
and our district. His leadership and partnership in securing critical 
funding for our families will never be forgotten.
  Please join me and the 12th Congressional District in recognizing Doc 
Dougherty and his service to the people of Garden City, as we wish him 
well in all his future endeavors.
I rise today to thank our guest chaplain, 
Pastor David Mason, for his opening prayer on May 10th. Ive had the 
pleasure of knowing David for quite some time, as he serves as Pastor 
at my home church, Walnut Valley Baptist in Hot Springs, Arkansas.
  David and his wife, Aamie, who serves as a family counselor, are dear 
friends of mine who have a heart for sharing the gospel and ministering 
not only inside the church building but in the community with 
individuals wherever there is a need.
  David and Aamie have been faithful servants and leaders for many 
years. It was a pleasure to host them in D.C. this week.
  I, along with others in Arkansas Fourth Congressional District, are 
grateful to Pastor Mason and his wife Aamie for their servant hearts 
and their obedience in serving God.
I rise today to recognize Jack Clouse for 
earning the Arvada Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth Award.
  Jack has overcome many challenges along his journey to success, 
demonstrating perseverance at every step. Students who strive to make 
the most of their education, like Jack, develop crucial skills and a 
work ethic that will guide them for the rest of their lives. This award 
is a testament to Jacks hard work, determination, and perseverance at 
Standley Lake High School and is clearly just the beginning of a bright 
and promising future.
  It is my honor to congratulate Jack Clouse on achieving the Arvada 
Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth Award.
I rise today to recognize Jacob 
McCullough for earning the Arvada Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for 
Youth Award.
  Jacob has overcome many challenges along his journey to success, 
demonstrating perseverance at every step. Students who strive to make 
the most of their education, like Jacob, develop crucial skills and a 
work ethic that will guide them for the rest of their lives. This award 
is a testament to Jacobs hard work, determination, and perseverance at 
Standley Lake High School and is clearly just the beginning of a bright 
and promising future.
  It is my honor to congratulate Jacob McCullough on achieving the 
Arvada Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth Award.
I rise today to recognize Kimberly Olivas 
Soto for earning the Arvada Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth 
Award.
  Kimberly has overcome many challenges along her journey to success, 
demonstrating perseverance at every step. Students who strive to make 
the most of their education, like Kimberly, develop crucial skills and 
a work ethic that will guide them for the rest of their lives. This 
award is a testament to Kimberlys hard work, determination, and 
perseverance at Standley Lake High School and is clearly just the 
beginning of a bright and promising future.
  It is my honor to congratulate Kimberly Olivas Soto on achieving the 
Arvada Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth Award.
I rise today to recognize Victoria Quine 
for earning the Arvada Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth Award.
  Victoria has overcome many challenges along her journey to success, 
demonstrating perseverance at every step. Students who strive to make 
the most of their education, like Victoria, develop crucial skills and 
a work ethic that will guide them for the rest of their lives. This 
award is a testament to Victorias hard work, determination, and 
perseverance at Sobesky Academy and is clearly just the beginning of a 
bright and promising future.
  It is my honor to congratulate Victoria Quine on achieving the Arvada 
Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth Award.