I rise today to commemorate the naming 
of the portion of U.S. Highway 50 from Bahner Quarry Road to Tower Road 
the ``SGT James L. Shipley Memorial Highway. Sergeant Shipley was a 
great man who served his country valiantly during the Second World War. 
At only 19 years of age, Mr. Shipley made the decision to go to his 
local recruiting station and serve his country during a time of war, 
which led to him becoming a crew chief and mechanic for the 332nd 
Fighter Group. Little did Mr. Shipley know this decision would place 
him in one of the most respected military organizations from World War 
II which would pave the way for African Americans service in the armed 
forces.
  After Germanys surrender, Sergeant Shipley returned home to Tipton, 
Missouri where he ran a farm and operated a gas station along U.S. 
Highway 50 with his loving wife Mildred. While working hard to support 
his family, Sergeant Shipley frequently made time to share his 
experiences with community groups and schools in the area.
  Sergeant Shipleys long and storied life charts several important 
chapters in our states and countrys history. The ``SGT James L. 
Shipley Memorial Highway will stand as an important reminder of his 
tremendous dedication to his community and country for generations to 
come.
, please join me in commemorating the ``SGT James L. 
Shipley Memorial Highway.
as a partner of the Vietnam War 
Commemoration, I recently had the privilege to honor Master Sergeant 
Willie Manning of Erwin for his distinguished career of service in the 
United States Air Force. Throughout his multidecade career, Master 
Sergeant Manning received numerous accolades and awards from his 
superiors for his outstanding performance and countless mission 
accomplishments. From achieving the highest level of training in his 
field as an ``Informational Superintendent to his numerous AF 
Commendation Medals, including for his support to the 9th AF during 
quality inspections of the 116th Fighter Wings operational readiness, 
Master Sergeant Manning proved an invaluable member of our nations 
military.
  Master Sergeant Manning first began his career as a Clerk Typist in 
1971. Stationed at Dobbins Air Force Base, Master Sergeant Manning 
employed his expertise in quality information management for both 
operations domestic and abroad. This included ensuring quality 
maintenance for all forms of information management, from simple 
communication letters to the most protected forms of classified 
documentation. And revered for his leadership and computer systems 
expertise, when the Air Force received new technology, the Georgia 
State Adjutant General personally asked Master Sergeant Manning to 
provide the software training to his staff.
  However, Master Sergeant Manning always highlights the brotherhood he 
shared with his comrades as a source of joy and gratitude. In his own 
words, ``we had each others back . . . I could be counted on, and I 
knew I could count on my fellow airmen. He fondly remembers his 
experience flying with officers in F4 and F15 fighter jets as the 
second seater in appreciation of his administrative efforts; or his 
ability to pilot Cessna 125, the smallest two-seat single engine 
aircraft.
  After 25 years of distinguished military service, Master Sergeant 
Manning retired from the U.S. Air Force in 1996 as a Noncommissioned 
Officer in Charge (NCOIC) of base administration for a fighter wing in 
Georgia. Following his retirement, Master Sergeant Manning continued to 
use his skills to benefit his community, assisting the Chamber of 
Commerce and supporting his local church and nearby senior center. I 
thank him for his service and sacrifice. Interested Vietnam era 
veterans and their families can sign up for recognition at: &lt;a href=https://
harshbarger.house.gov/&gt;https://
harshbarger.house.gov/&lt;/a&gt;.../honoring-vietnam-veterans.
I rise today to commemorate a momentous 
occasion in the history of New York State, the Town of Schuyler Falls 
175th anniversary.
  In the early 19th century, a group of visionaries established a 
settlement bordered on the north and east by the Saranac River. Through 
their determination and perseverance, these settlers laid foundations 
for what would become the prosperous town of Schuyler Falls, formally 
erected from the Town of Plattsburgh on April 4, 1848. Residents have 
preserved its unique heritage, embraced progress, and fostered a 
vibrant spirit of unity that continues to this day.
  Schuyler Falls has beautiful rolling hills, accessible agriculture, 
timber, and waterpower, all of which provided early residents with key 
resources in the Towns founding industries. The initial successes of 
the Towns founders paved a way for a stalwart, close-knit community 
that values hard work and dedication.
  Today, Schuyler Falls continues to flourish with a plethora of local 
farms, small businesses, and a growing commercial businesses sector. On 
behalf of New Yorks 21st District, it is my honor to recognize and 
celebrate the

175th anniversary of Schuyler Falls, a hallmark of the North Country.
I want to pay tribute to a valued staff 
member and trusted advisor, Zachary Isakowitz, as he leaves to embark 
on the next steps in his career. Although he will be greatly missed, I 
could not be happier for the impact he will continue making within the 
technology sector.
  Zach has served as my Legislative Director for the last two and a 
half years. His role has been vital to the passing of some of my most 
important legislation, including the CHIPS for America Act.
  Zachs work was, foremost, dedicated to promoting the growth of 
semiconductor manufacturing in America. Together, we have seen billions 
invested in the technology industry in Texas and across the nation. We 
have secured funding for dozens of projects in Texas-10, including many 
at institutes of higher education. And weve passed crucial legislation 
combatting childhood cancer.
  I would like to thank Zach for a job well done. I am grateful for the 
dedication and support he has given to me, the staff, and the people of 
Texas 10th Congressional District. I wish him all the best, both in 
life and throughout the remainder of his career.
  While his presence in my office will certainly be missed, I know Zach 
will continue to leave a positive mark on D.C. and our Nation. And 
remember, once a member of team McCaul, always a member of team McCaul.
I missed these votes due to an urgent 
personal matter.
  Had I been present, I would have voted YEA on Roll Call No. 407 and 
YEA on Roll Call No. 406.
I rise today to recognize Kami Welch for 
being named an Outstanding Woman in Business by the Denver Business 
Journal.
  Each year, Denver Business Journal chooses 34 exceptional women in 
the Denver metro area who are the areas top executives, entrepreneurs, 
philanthropists, and influencers. This year, Kami was selected for this 
award after 14 years in the Chamber industry, including 10 years with 
the Arvada Chamber of Commerce. She is an outstanding leader, dedicated 
to the success of the Arvada community and focused on supporting women 
in business.
  Kamis efforts to develop meaningful industry and business solutions 
have led to significant improvements in the citys domestic tourism, a 
more diversified economy, and a stronger environment for local and 
small businesses. Those who have had the privilege of working with Kami 
attest to her unwavering commitment to the Arvada community.
, on behalf of the people of Colorados Seventh 
Congressional District, I thank Kami Welch for her dedicated service to 
Arvada as well as the citizens of Colorado.
I am honored to commend to the House the 
Mansfield Noon Optimist Club. Members of the club gathered earlier 
today to kick off an extended celebration of the centennial of their 
organization.
  Optimist Clubs date back to the early 1900s, established to support 
young people and encourage their development. The Mansfield club, 
founded in October 1923, is the second oldest in the State of Ohio. 
Through the years, its members have devoted countless volunteer hours 
to promote youth-related programming throughout Richland County, from 
clothing drives to college scholarship competitions and Adopt-a-Child 
gift drives.
  To commemorate this special anniversary, this year the club has 
donated $50,000 to build a childrens playground at the Buckeye 
Imagination Museum in downtown Mansfield. A ribbon-cutting ceremony 
will take place next month.
, on behalf of the people of Ohios Fourth Congressional 
District, I congratulate the members of the Mansfield Noon Optimist 
Club as they mark 100 years of being ``Friends of Youth.
Title IV of Senate Resolution 4, agreed to by the Senate of February 
4, 1977, calls for establishment of a system for a computerized 
schedule of all meetings and hearings of Senate committees, 
subcommittees, joint committees, and committees of conference. This 
title requires all such committees to notify the Office of the Senate 
Daily Digest--designated by the Rules Committee--of the time, place and 
purpose of the meetings, when scheduled and any cancellations or 
changes in the meetings as they occur.
  As an additional procedure along with the computerization of this 
information, the Office of the Senate Daily Digest will prepare this 
information for printing in the Extensions of Remarks section of the 
Congressional Record on Monday and Wednesday of each week.
  Meetings scheduled for Thursday, September 28, 2023 may be found in 
the Daily Digest of todays Record.

     10 a.m.
       Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation
       Subcommittee on Communications, Media, and Broadband
         To hold hearings to examine protecting Americans from 
           robocalls.
                                                            SR-253
     2:30 p.m.
       Committee on the Judiciary
       Subcommittee on Intellectual Property
         To hold hearings to examine back to school with the SHOP 
           SAFE Act, focusing on protecting our families from 
           unsafe online counterfeits.
                                                            SD-226

     10 a.m.
       Committee on Appropriations
         To receive a closed briefing on United States assistance 
           to Ukrainian Air Defenses.
                                                           SVC-217
       Committee on Foreign Relations
         To hold hearings to examine the BUILD Act reauthorization 
           and Development Finance Corporation oversight.
                                                            SD-419
       Committee on the Judiciary
         To hold hearings to examine pending nominations.
                                                            SD-226
     2 p.m.
       Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation
         To hold hearings to examine CHIPS and science 
           implementation and oversight.
                                                            SR-253
     2:30 p.m.
       Committee on Foreign Relations
       Subcommittee on East Asia, the Pacific, and International 
           Cybersecurity Policy
         To hold hearings to examine security on the Korean 
           Peninsula.
                                                            SD-419
     3 p.m.
       Committee on Veterans Affairs
         To hold hearings to examine VA accountability and 
           transparency, focusing on care and benefits for 
           veterans.
                                                            SR-418