I rise today to honor the 
life and legacy of Rabbi Menachem Mendel Schneerson, known as the 
Rebbe, a spiritual leader whose impact on faith, education, and 
morality continues to inspire millions.
  Born in 1902, the Rebbe endured the horrors of Russian communism and 
evils of Nazi Germany before arriving in the United States

in 1941. From here, he led efforts to rebuild Jewish life, promoting 
values of kindness, education, and service to others.
  He sent rabbinical students across the country, including to South 
Dakota, to reach Jews in isolated communities. His vision led to the 
Chabad-Lubavitch movement becoming the worlds largest Jewish 
educational organization, now active in all 50 states and 109 
countries.
  The Rebbe believed education must include ethics and character, not 
just academics. His message resonated far beyond his faith, earning him 
the Congressional Gold Medal and recognition through Education and 
Sharing Day, proclaimed annually by U.S. Presidents since 1978.
  Education and Sharing Day represents an excellent opportunity for us 
to reflect on the Rebbes vision and leadership. May we carry forward 
the Rebbes legacy by choosing kindness, living with purpose, and 
working toward a more compassionate world.
the Republicans Reckless Budget Scheme is 
back on the House floor today, proposing the same devastating cuts to 
our families and communities in exchange for massive tax breaks for 
Elon Musk, President Trump, and their billionaire buddies.
  I am joining every Democrat in the House and Senate in opposing this 
resolution.
  Apparently, Republicans werent paying attention when Americans 
across the country took to the streets last weekend to tell them to 
keep their hands off our healthcare, our education, and food assistance 
for our children, our elders, and our neighbors in need. I was there 
speaking to my constituents, and I heard them loud and clear.
  This is not the direction the American people want our country to go.
  But despite that, House Republicans are using their majority to 
advance an agenda that serves the wealthiest Americans at the expense 
of our Nations working families. The Republican budget is a framework 
that instructs the Energy and Commerce Committee to cut $880 billion. 
That level of cut is impossible without decimating Medicaid. The 
Agriculture Committee will have to find at least $230 billion in cuts, 
which threatens food assistance like SNAP even as food prices are 
rising.
  Lets be clear: Republicans are using these cuts to our neighbors to 
offset their tax breaks for giant corporations and billionaires like 
Elon Musk. And even after all these cruel cuts, their budget will still 
burden Americans with trillions of dollars in new debt.
  President Trumps `Big Beautiful Bill doesnt do anything to address 
the high cost of living or fix the economic mess created by the 
Presidents trade war. In fact, it adds more burden for Minnesota 
families who are looking for help with the rising cost of living.
  Nearly 1.3 million Minnesotans--about one quarter of our state--are 
covered by Medicaid. A cut of this magnitude would have severe 
consequences for health care access for the families, seniors, people 
with disabilities, and especially children who rely on this coverage. 
That includes 172,000 of my constituents here in the Fourth District, 
90,000 of whom are children on CHIP. In our district, 54,000 
Minnesotans rely on SNAP to put food on the table. SNAP assistance is 
particularly important to children as well as many seniors on a fixed 
income. The health and well-being of our communities are under attack 
by this Republican majority.
, I am voting no on this betrayal of our values and our 
constituents, and I will continue to oppose all Republican efforts to 
take away food, healthcare, and basic government services that 
Minnesotans rely on.
HONORING THE LIFE AND SERVICE OF ROLLAND WADE ``R.W. NELSON
I rise today to honor the incredible 
life and distinguished service of Rolland Wade ``R.W. Nelson, who 
passed away at the age of 98 on April 8, 2025. Mr. Nelson is part of 
the Greatest co-founded Kemin Industries, a Des Moines-based human and 
animal health and nutrition company that employs more than 3,700 people 
worldwide. Mr. Johnson deserves recognition for his service to not only 
our district but also the billions of lives he has around the world his 
generosity touched.
  Born in Kansas City, Missouri, in 1927, Nelson moved to Des Moines at 
the age of seven. He graduated from Dowling Catholic High School in 
1944 and began studies at Drake University on a football scholarship, 
before being drafted into military service during World War II. Nelson 
served in the United States Army Air Corps from 1945 to 1947, attaining 
the rank of Corporal. He was deployed to the Philippines as a crew 
chief for B-29 bombers, earning several service ribbons.
  After his honorable discharge, Nelson returned to Drake University, 
earning Bachelor of Arts degrees in biology and chemistry. In 1953, he 
married Mary Kelleher, and together they raised five children. In 1961, 
with $10,000 in savings, they founded Kemin Industries, operating 
initially from their living room. Under Nelsons leadership, Kemin 
expanded into a global company offering over 500 specialty ingredients 
across various industries, with a presence in more than 120 countries.
  Nelson held four patents and received numerous accolades, including 
the Presidents ``E Certificate for Exports from President Nixon in 
1971 and the Presidents ``E Star Award for Excellence in Export from 
President Carter in 1978. He was inducted into the Iowa Business Hall 
of Fame in 2006.
  Beyond his professional achievements Mr. Nelson leaves behind a 
beautiful family, his wife Mary; daughters Elizabeth ``Libby, Janet 
and Molly and another son, David; 13 grandchildren and seven great-
grandchildren.
, I invite my colleagues to join me in remembering Edward 
Johnson. His dedication to improving the lives of his fellow Iowans, 
particularly fellow veterans, will leave a legacy. May his memory 
inspire us all.
, Ms. Speaker, I voted in opposition to H.R. 1048 
because, if enacted as written, it would place burdensome, duplicative, 
and potentially harmful requirements upon our Nations institutions of 
higher education, without significantly improving our national 
security.
  My colleague Congresswoman Tlaib offered two amendments to this 
legislation that raised her concerns with how we identify countries and 
investments of concern. We discussed these valid and serious issues, 
but I could not support the amendments as written because one failed to 
protect due process and the other omitted definitions.
  I voted against amendment number 5 from Rep. Tlaib of Michigan 
because the identification of foreign countries of concern should not 
be based solely on alleged violations or warrants. Due process is 
important, and the way this amendment was drafted would impose 
restrictions on a nation based upon allegations, not convictions.
  I voted present for amendment number 6 from Rep. Tlaib of Michigan 
because I share my colleagues serious concerns about entities who 
facilitate state violence and violations of international law and human 
rights. However, this amendment would authorize the Secretary of State 
to make those determinations without the definitions necessary to make 
Congressional intent clear. I worry that, absent those definitions, 
this authority could be used in a politically punitive manner by the 
administration. But I hope in the future we can revisit this effort to 
address the serious issue of international human rights violations.
  My district has many institutions of higher education, and it is 
important to my constituents that I take seriously the impacts of 
legislation on college and university students in my district, and the 
institutions serving them. The DETERRENT Act does contain some 
proposals that have my support and the support of our higher education 
community, like making reporting requirements annual and better 
aligning definitions like ``countries of concern across federal 
agencies.
  However, in the name of increasing oversight of foreign influence, 
this bill would actually make oversight less effective and create 
confusion and security vulnerabilities. It would require the Department 
of Education to vet contracts between institutions and foreign entities 
for security risks. With the Trump administration attempting to 
eliminate the Department of Education, it is unclear how the Department 
would take on these extra responsibilities.
  I voted against this legislation because it creates more problems 
than solutions.
I rise today to recognize an outstanding 
American and true patriot, Mr. Bobby Brite, who was named Veteran of 
the Year for 2024 by the American Legion.
  Bobby is a 26-year veteran of the United States Army who served our 
country with integrity, sacrifice, and quiet leadership. He served on 
active duty from 1990 to 1996 and again from 2003 to 2005, when his 
work as an infantry platoon leader during Operation Iraqi Freedom II 
earned him the Bronze Star Medal and the Combat Infantry Badge.
  Following his retirement in 2023, Bobby rededicated his life to 
serving his brothers and sisters who also hung up the uniform. Today, 
he is Post Historian for American Legion Post 141 in Howell, Michigan, 
where he previously served as Post Commander, 1st Vice Commander, and 
Finance Officer.
  He is also Secretary for the VFW Post 6464, President of the Howell 
Veterans Society, American Legion Department of Michigan Membership 
Committee Member, and a Post 141 Past Commanders Committee Member.
  To put it simply, Bobby Brite is a pillar in the veteran community--
offering support, building friendships, and fighting to ensure that no 
veteran is left behind. Whether its helping a fellow veteran navigate 
the VA system, organizing community events, or just being someone to 
lean on, Bobby is always there. His efforts exemplify the very spirit 
of the American Legion--``For God and Country--and I could think of 
no one more deserving of this tremendous honor.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in congratulating my good 
friend, Bobby Brite, on this incredible achievement. Our community, the 
state of Michigan, and the United States of America are grateful for 
his continued service to our Nation and its heroes.
I rise today to recognize a heroic resident 
of Missouris Fourth Congressional District, Mr. Danny Wells.
a team leader for the public works department in the 
city of Peculiar. Earlier this year, middle Missouri was in the grips 
of a historic cold front with temperatures well below freezing and wind 
chills regularly hovering in the single digits.
  On January 24th, with temperatures in the twenties, Danny was driving 
down State Highway YY. Out of the corner of his eye, he spotted a young 
child in a ditch--barely clothed and shivering in the cold. Mr. Wells 
jumped into action. After searching for any adults nearby, he pulled 
over and literally gave the boy the coat off his back and that hat off 
his head. Danny then put the boy in the truck, cranked up the heat, and 
began rubbing his feet to warm them.
  Danny immediately radioed the proper authorities to get this boy the 
medical care he desperately needed. With temperatures so low, the risk 
of catastrophe was imminent. Peculiar Police Chief Don Shepard, who was 
on the scene, said the boy ``was near hypothermic and might well have 
died had Danny not found him.
  Danny is an Army Veteran and having served in Iraq and Afghanistan, 
he is no stranger to perilous situations. And this specific situation 
was personal to him. ``Ive got grandkids about the same age, so it 
just hit pretty close to home. Serving the public is what were here 
for; it is what we do. I hope anybody in that situation would have done 
the same thing, Mr. Wells said.
  On behalf of the Fourth District, we thank Mr. Wells for his service 
to our Nation and the community of Peculiar. His actions makes clear, 
he has a servants heart and takes his work seriously. We applaud his 
heroic actions to prevent disaster on that January afternoon.