it is with great pleasure that I, 
along with Rep. Moskowitz, rise to recognize the tremendous 
achievements of Diana Nyad.
  Diana Nyad was born in New York City on August 22, 1949, and raised 
in Ft. Lauderdale, Florida. She is a legendary endurance swimmer, 
author, inspirational speaker and sports journalist. She attended Pine 
Crest School in Ft. Lauderdale and later graduated Phi Beta Kappa from 
Lake Forest College.
a new speed record for both men and 
women when she circled Manhattan Island in 1975 in 7 hours and 57 
minutes. She was the first person to swim North to South across Lake 
Ontario in 1974, and was the world champion on the marathon circuit 
that year. Her first attempt to swim from Havana, Cuba to Key West, 
Florida was in 1978 and 35 years later, at the age of 64, Diana became 
the first to ever swim from Cuba to Florida without the aid of a shark 
cage--110.86 miles, 52 hours and 54 minutes.
1986. She is also an International Marathon Swimming 
Hall of Fame Honoree and an ISHOF Al Schoenfield Media Award recipient. 
In addition to her illustrious career as an athlete, Ms. Nyad founded 
the national walking initiative EverWalk and wrote and starred in the 
off-Broadway play, The Swimmer.
  In 2014, the City of Key West honored Ms. Nyad with an historic 
bronze plaque installed at Smathers Beach where she walked ashore at 
the end of her Cuba crossing. On November 6, 2025, a State of Florida 
Historic Marker tribute to Dianas inspirational life will be unveiled 
and eventually be on permanent display at Las Olas Beach in Ft. 
Lauderdale.
  It is with great enthusiasm that I congratulate Ms. Nyad on her 
accomplishments and ask Floridians to join me in thanking her for 
contributing to our states rich cultural history.
I rise today to recognize one of the 
oldest living residents of Arkansas, my constituent, Mrs. Ida Newbill, 
on her 111th birthday.
  Born on October 14, 1914, Mrs. Newbill has lived through more than a 
century of extraordinary progress, bearing witness to generations of 
history with grace, wisdom, and faith. She was raised attending Sunday 
school, and continues to build her life upon strong values, which have 
served as guiding principles for her family and community.
  Together with her late husband, Mr. Joseph Newbill, Mrs. Newbill 
raised six children, four of whom are still living: daughter Alberta 
Glass (age of 94), daughter Willie Mae Terry (age of 91), daughter 
Augustine Terry (age of 90), and daughter Ida Henderson (age of 88). 
a proud matriarch of a United States Army family, with 
her son, grandson, and great-grandson having honorably served our 
Nation.
  She also has a profound love for locomotives. Each year, a special 
locomotive visit by the North Louisiana and Arkansas Railroad to Arch 
Street in Eudora, Arkansas, near her home, has become a cherished 
tradition to celebrate her birthday. Today is no different, Danny 
Robbins will drive the train to her hometown and host a birthday 
celebration for ``Momma Ida, as she is often referred to throughout 
the community.
  May her life continue to remind us all that faith, family, and 
perseverance are the foundations of a happy life. It is with great 
admiration that I wish Mrs. Newbill a very happy birthday and honor her 
contributions to the 1st Congressional District of Arkansas, and I 
extend my sincerest wishes for continued joy, peace, and health in the 
years ahead.
CELEBRATING THE 300TH ANNIVERSARY OF SALEM HELLERS EVANGELICAL 
                            of pennsylvania
I am pleased to recognize the congregation 
of Salem Hellers Evangelical Reformed Church for their 300th 
anniversary.
  Over the past year, the congregation of Salem Hellers Evangelical 
Reformed Church has commemorated three centuries of faith and service. 
The churchs humble beginnings date back to a time before the founding 
of both Lancaster County and the United States. Today, Salem Hellers 
stands as a testament to the strength and perseverance of a faith-based 
community that has flourished for generations.
  Salem Hellers was founded in 1725 by Palatine German immigrants to 
the Conestoga Valley and claims to be one of the oldest Reformed 
congregations in Lancaster County. Initially, parishioners gathered for 
worship in homes and barns before constructing a log cabin that served 
as their first permanent site of worship, a structure that stood until 
1860.
  Throughout its history, the congregation of Salem Hellers has been 
home to true patriots and community leaders. At least 144 of its 
members have served our Nation in conflicts dating back to the American 
Revolution. One of the churchs first ministers, John Philip Boehm, is 
recognized by many as the founder of the German Reformed Church in the 
United States. Today, the cemetery at Salem Hellers is the final 
resting place of more than 2,700 individuals, each one a contributor to 
the thriving and faithful community that continues to embody the spirit 
of Lancaster County.
  As the congregation concludes this year of celebration, it is fitting 
to honor its storied past and its promising future. For 300 years, 
Salem Hellers Evangelical Reformed Church has served as a bastion of 
faith and community for the people of Lancaster County. As generations 
continue to worship in this historic church, I know the congregation 
will continue to serve its mission to both the community and its faith.
  I extend my heartfelt congratulations to the congregation of Salem 
Hellers Evangelical Reformed Church and wish them continued blessings 
as they celebrate their 300th anniversary.
I rise today to recognize 
and congratulate Bill Zortman on the remarkable milestone of hosting 
his 5000th radio show. As a longtime voice behind ``Its Your 
Business, Bill has amplified leading voices to guide South Dakota 
listeners with practical wisdom and sound judgement.
  Bills distinguished career in radio and television broadcasting 
spans more than forty years, including over fifteen years here in South 
Dakota. Beyond the microphone, he has demonstrated a deep commitment to 
public service and community leadership.
  After the terrorist attacks on September 11, 2001, Bill took a break 
from journalism and served as the Executive Director for the Red Cross 
of South Dakota and Nebraska. He has also contributed to many causes 
close to home, serving as President of Realtors for Kids, organizing 
the Professional Real Estate Associates Military Thank You Picnic, and 
earning recognition from his peers as Real Estate Spirit of the Year in 
2008 and the Professional Real Estate Associates Spirit Award in 2012.
  Bill has become more than just a broadcaster; hes a trusted voice 
for business, agriculture, and civic life in our state. Through ``Its 
Your Business and ``lts Your Business to Know, Bill has built a 
trusted forum for businesses, public leaders, and neighbors.
, I ask the House of Representatives to join me in 
celebrating Bill Zortman on his 5000th broadcast and in recognizing his 
decades of dedication to his profession and community. South Dakota is 
fortunate to call him one of our own.
I rise today to say aloha and congratulations 
to the newest cohort of Teach For America (TFA) Hawaii.
  TFA, a critical national nonprofit partner since 1989 in our effort 
to eliminate educational inequality, continues its mission to ``enlist, 
develop, and mobilize as many as possible of our Nations most 
promising future leaders to grow and strengthen the movement for 
educational excellence. By recruiting and training college graduates 
to teach in high-need schools for at least two years, it aims to expand 
educational opportunities for all.
  This school year, TFA Hawaii marks its 20th year of service to the 
State of Hawaii by welcoming 103 corps members to classrooms across our 
islands. In total, the TFA network in Hawaii now has 631 corps members 
and alumni, collectively improving the lives of over 18,000 students.
  I especially commend the programs focus on locally-rooted 
leadership. TFA Hawaii has recruited 259 corps members and alumni who 
are kama`aina, born and raised in our islands, including 89 Kanaka 
Maoli. They embody the sense of kuleana and community responsibility 
necessary to provide critical education support for our keiki.
  The impacts of our TFA Hawaii kumu--or teachers--have lasted far 
beyond their initial commitment, with over 500 alumni remaining in 
education across Hawaii, 15 of them now serving as school leaders.
  Their mission reminds us of the `olelo no`eau ``hahai no ka ua i ka 
ululaau.: the rain follows the forest. By intentionally investing in 
this forest of local talent, we ensure a bright future for all our 
students.
  I offer my mahalo to the new corps members and alumni for their 
continued service.
I rise today to recognize Caltha Seymour 
as a 2025 She Leads America Christian Woman of Distinction award 
recipient.
  Caltha Seymour is Director of Mission Critical Power Solutions in 
Eatons electrical sector, where she leads global federal sales and 
strategic growth initiatives for one of the

worlds most trusted power management companies. Based in Washington, 
D.C., she directs a team responsible for government contracting, 
commercial sales, marketing, customer success, and strategic 
partnerships, ensuring reliable power solutions in mission-critical 
environments.
  Originally from Canada, Caltha has been with Eaton for nearly a 
decade, serving in many leadership roles spanning new product 
development, product marketing, and channel management. She is a 
graduate of Eatons Global Leadership Development Program and 
previously oversaw $262 million in distribution partner sales as the 
companys first National Channel Manager for Industrial Controls.
  Her leadership extends far beyond business into nonprofit, cultural, 
and faith-based service. As co-founder and chair of Heaven to the Yeah, 
she empowers women in sports, championing the womens decathlon for the 
2032 Olympics in Brisbane while sponsoring athletes internationally. 
She is a board member of Global Hope, serving vulnerable populations in 
Iraq and the Middle East by developing sustainable solutions for women 
and children. She also serves as corporate chair for Influence Women, 
chairs the Salvation Army Western Territory Advisory Board, contributes 
to Women Business Collaboratives in the Arena initiative, and advises 
the Cleveland Orchestra.
  Guided by her deep faith in Jesus Christ, Caltha sees her work as a 
calling to serve with integrity, compassion, and excellence. A member 
of She Leads America, she is being honored in 2025 as a Christian Woman 
of Distinction, exemplifying faith in action across every sphere of 
influence.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in congratulating this 
outstanding woman of distinction.
I rise today to recognize an extraordinary 
young leader from Oregons 3rd Congressional District, Samruddha 
Preuitt, a graduate of David Douglas High School in Portland. Samruddha 
was recently named a 2025 U.S. Presidential Scholar--one of just 161 
students nationwide to earn this prestigious honor.
  Since 1964, the U.S. Presidential Scholars Program has celebrated the 
academic excellence, leadership, and dedication of our Nations most 
distinguished high school seniors. This honor is reserved for students 
who not only achieve top scores on college entrance exams but also 
demonstrate outstanding scholarship, character, and service.
  Samruddha embodies all of these qualities. He now studies data 
science and engineering at the University of Connecticut, drawn by its 
strong commitment to undergraduate research. As someone who engaged in 
undergraduate research myself, I know how transformative those 
experiences can be--and how they help prepare the next generation of 
leaders in science, technology, and public service.
  This achievement reflects not only Samruddhas individual brilliance 
and perseverance, but also the strength of our public schools, our 
educators, and a community that values opportunity and hard work.
  I congratulate him on this remarkable achievement, and I wish him 
continued success as he pursues his academic and professional journey.
I rise today to recognize 
and honor the remarkable achievements of Peacocks Signs &amp; Designs, a 
venerable black-owned business located in Grenada, Mississippi, that 
has been a pillar of the community for nearly five decades.
  Founded in 1976 by Walter Peacock, this family-owned enterprise began 
humbly as a side endeavor creating personalized license plates. Mr. 
Peacock, a talented artist and dedicated entrepreneur, transformed his 
passion and skill into one of Grenada Countys oldest and most 
successful businesses.
  Through decades of unwavering hard work and commitment, Peacocks 
Signs &amp; Designs has grown from a small local operation into a respected 
company serving hometown restaurants, boutiques, shopping plazas, and 
even national restaurant and retail chains. Mr. Peacocks dedication to 
quality and service has earned the business a reputation for 
excellence, not only in Grenada but also in surrounding communities and 
smaller towns that lack local sign companies.
  Today, the legacy of Peacocks Signs continues with the involvement 
of Walter Peacocks two sons, Walter ``Winston Peacock, Jr. and Fred 
``Wesley Peacock. Together, they carry forward their fathers vision, 
expanding the companys reach while maintaining the high standards set 
by their father nearly 50 years ago.
  This multigenerational commitment is a testament to the strength of 
family, the power of entrepreneurship, and the impact of black-owned 
businesses on local economies and communities. It is through such 
steadfast dedication that small businesses like Peacocks Signs &amp; 
Designs contribute profoundly to the cultural and economic fabric of 
our great Nation.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in celebrating the 
enduring success of Peacocks Signs &amp; Designs and its inspiring 
founder, Walter Peacock, whose journey exemplifies the American spirit 
of perseverance, innovation, and family unity.
I rise to honor the Vietnam and Korean War 
veterans who will travel to Washington, D.C. on October 15, 2025, with 
Honor Flight Chicago, a program that provides WWII, Vietnam, and Korean 
War veterans the opportunity to visit their memorials on The National 
Mall in Washington, D.C. These memorials were built to honor their 
courage and service to their country.
  The American Veteran is one of our greatest treasures. The Soldiers, 
Airmen, Sailors, Marines, and Coast Guardsmen who will travel here on 
October 15, 2025, answered our Nations call to service during one of 
its greatest times of need. From the Pacific Asian Theatre to the 
Korean Theater, these brave Americans risked life and limb, gave 
service, and sacrificed much, all while embodying what it is to be a 
hero. We owe them more gratitude than can ever be expressed.
  I welcome these brave veterans to Washington and to their memorials. 
I am proud to include in the Record the names of these men and women 
for all to see, hear, and recognize, and I call on my colleagues to 
rise and join me in expressing gratitude.

       Chris Argianas, Richard L. Askam, Andrew Baldacci, John 
     Barszcz, Ronald Barwegen, Dennis R. Beach, James F. Bennett, 
     Jr., Peter Biancalana, Donald Blair, William M. Blair, Mose 
     H. Bonds, James E. Bowen, Lawrence J. Bruce, Garrick 
     Bukowski, Daniel E. Burress, Harold V. Campbell, Dennis P. 
     Claxton, John P. Clyde, Gary M. Collins, Richard J. Connell, 
     Charles A. Coppess, Ronald R. Cunz, George R. Cwik, Steven D. 
     Davis, Michael A. DeSmedt, David Dima, John R. Dolan, Terence 
     J. Dolan, Michael D. Dorr, Patrick V. Duffy, Timothy J.H. 
     Dummer, Daniel J. Fontanetta, Thomas Frankiewicz, Mark L. 
     Fumagalli, Kenneth Furto, Robert Garcia, Frank Gawel, Alfred 
     W. Geiersbach, William Geigner, John S. Gritsuk, Walter R. 
     Guest, Myron Gulych, Ellery P. Gunther, Jr., Thomas A. 
     Haggerty, Martin E. Hall, Jr., Michael P. Harrington, John 
     Herrera, Paul R. Herrold, Gilbert R. High, Lawrence A. Hodek, 
     Terrance L. Holz, James E. Johnson, Jr., Ronald E. Kalemba, 
     Marton Kander, Stanley L. Kasprzak, Robert Keehnast, Edward 
     Klama, Andrew F. Knauf, Jr., Kenneth Kroll, John P. Lahey, 
     Daniel Lardi, Charles A. Larson, Peter L. Larson, Robert F. 
     LeClercq, Mark Liset, John W. Long, Steven A. Lumbert, Thomas 
     Malesky, William Malesky, Robert J. Marcinek, Gary C. 
     Middleton, Glen Missaggia, Peter H. Monday, John F. Morgan, 
     Rickey Morris, Frank D. Mossman, Harry F. Murphy, Gary E. 
     Nelson, Donald E. Nordyke, Glen D. Norquist, Robert B. Novak, 
     Martin J. OBrien, Jr., Stephen N. Olejniczak, Gerald Paris, 
     Arthur W. Parsons, Jr., Gloria Patterson, Maurice Patterson, 
     Robert J. Payne, Sidney R. Peterson, Peter Rampe, Andrew C. 
     Reitz, Gary Roberson, Danny J. Rudy, James C. Russell, John 
     W. Sass, Richard H. Schultz, Martin H. Sloan, Timothy 
     Sorensen, Larry W. Steele, Johnny L. Stewart, William F. 
     Stewart, Donald L. Stoops, Lawrence P. Studer, John C. 
     Swiderski, Donald F. Tilton, Anthony Trekas, Frank C. Trout, 
     John D. Varble, Pedro B. Velez, Thomas T. Wefler, Warren W. 
     Wiggenhauser, Richard J. Wittkofski, and Sharon Zajac.
today, I introduce the Government 
Accountability Office District of Columbia Home Rule Act. This bill 
would repeal the authority of the U.S. Government Accountability Office 
(GAO) over the District of Columbia.
  GAO, a federal agency that conducts investigations and audits for 
Congress, has the same authority over D.C. that it has over federal 
agencies. GAOs authorizing statute defines D.C. as a federal agency. 
In addition, GAOs authorizing statute and the D.C. Home Rule Act 
require GAO to engage in specific types of oversight of D.C.
  D.C. is not a federal agency, and it should never be treated as such. 
D.C. already has a locally appointed auditor and inspector general, so 
GAOs authority over D.C. is both redundant and offensive. GAO does not 
have general authority over states and cities, and therefore it should 
not have such authority over D.C.
  This bill is an important step to increase home rule for D.C. I urge 
my colleagues to support this bill.
I rise today to recognize two 
extraordinary women, Dr. Lynn Kowalski and Dr. Stephanie Wishnev, for 
completing one of the TransAmerica routes. It is one of the most 
challenging cycling endeavors in the world, spanning from Astoria, 
Oregon to Yorktown, Virginia.
  As an avid cyclist myself, I know the grit and determination it takes 
to complete even a single long-distance ride. What these two women 
accomplished is nothing short of remarkable. Over the course of five 
years, they rode coast-to-coast, fully self-supported, conquering steep 
mountain climbs, unpredictable weather, and thousands of miles of open 
road.
  Their journey not only tested their endurance but also embodied the 
very spirit of perseverance and adventure that defines our Nation. I 
commend Dr. Kowalski and Dr. Wishnev for their incredible achievement 
and for inspiring all of us who strive to push past limits and see what 
lies on the other side.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in recognizing their 
achievement.