I rise today to recognize David Hecker, 
the President of AFT Michigan on the occasion of his retirement. The 
tireless work he has put in to ensure our state has a strong public 
school system and the teachers to staff it is worthy of commendation.

  David was born in the Bronx to a family of strong Polish roots. Both 
parents were proud union members and like many Jews of the era, were 
supporters of progressive politics. David and his wife, Alice Audie-
Figueroa, who is also a well-known activist, are longtime members of 
Shir Tikvah in Troy.
  Aimed with a Masters degree from the University of Massachusetts and 
a PhD from University of Wisconsin, David began his work in labor when 
he joined Local 3220 in 1977, the union of graduate assistants at 
University of Wisconsin. After being elected president, David decided 
that building the labor movement would be his lifes work. Subsequent 
experience with the Allied Industrial Workers, Michigan State AFL-CIO, 
and the Metro Detroit AFL-CIO led to David taking a position at AFT 
Michigan, where he was eventually elected president in 2001. Since 
2004, he has also been the Vice President of the National AFT.
  David spent his time as President of AFT Michigan aggressively 
promoting the ideal that ``K-12 public education is the foundation of 
our democracy. During his tenure, AFT Michigan organized many new 
locals representing thousands of new members and built deep 
partnerships with community allies. Notably, David was one of the co-
chairs of the Coalition for the Future of Detroit School Children. This 
Coalitions report and legislative work resulted in legislation that 
saved the future of the Detroit Public Schools. David is also a co-
chair of the Metropolitan Affairs Coalition, a group of leaders brought 
together from business, labor, and the government to the same table to 
respond to our regions challenges and opportunities. No matter where 
he is, David is always working to bring people of all perspectives 
together to reach common goals that improve our region for all who live 
here.
, I ask my colleagues to join me today in celebrating the 
lifetime of work David Hecker has contributed to the cause of public 
education. Within our state and around the country, children in our 
public schools have quality educators and better access to resources 
due in no small part to his tireless efforts. We are saddened to see 
him leave, but we know his activism will not stop in ``retirement. I 
thank David for his significant contributions.
I rise to express my warmest 
wishes to Hobson Ellis Rodenbaugh in celebration of his 100th birthday.
  Hobson or Hobby as he is more affectionately known, was born in 
Hunterdon County on August 11, 1923. At 19, Hobby enlisted in the Army 
Signal Corps, serving in the Marshall Islands, Japan, and the 
Philippines during World War II. After being discharged, he came home 
to New Jersey where he married the Love of his life Virginia Mae Wands.
  Hobby continued to express his passion for service by serving on the 
Clinton Town Council and as Police Commissioner. In his retirement, 
Hobby joined the Union Township Senior Club of Hunterdon County and has 
served as both the Vice President and President of the organization. 
During his tenure Hobby has shared his passion for travel by arranging 
for the group to visit many locations around the country and the world.
, it is individuals like Hobby who should inspire us all. 
I wish to convey our appreciation for his years of service to our 
country and community. May he continue to touch the lives of many for 
years to come.
I rise today to honor Grace Vergara-
Mactal, Executive Director of SEIU 1107, for her upcoming retirement 
and a career of service to Nevada.
  Grace was born and raised in the Philippines where she earned her 
bachelors degree and worked as a medical technician. Immigrating to 
the U.S. in 1989, her first job involved mopping floors for $3.50 an 
hour, but she worked her way back into the health care field as a 
hospital lab technician. As a leader and organizer for her fellow lab 
workers, Grace was suspended from her job while circulating a petition. 
Undeterred, she pursued this activism, climbing from volunteer, to 
organizer, Organizing Director, Chief of Staff, and eventually leader 
of Local 1107.
  As one of the foremost leaders of the labor movement, both in Nevada 
and across the country, Grace has been a tireless advocate for good 
jobs and quality services during her incredible 3-decade career. As 
Executive Director, she represents nearly 20,000 health care and public 
service workers across the state.
  In this position, Grace has led with a commitment to mobilizing and 
empowering workers and families while fighting for economic, racial, 
and social justice. Her work focused on growing Local 1107, passing 
historic legislation, winning major contract battles, and building 
vital community coalitions. She also serves as Vice President and 
Executive Board Member of the Service Employees International Union, 
officer of the SEIU Asian Pacific Islander Caucus, and Executive Board 
Member of the Nevada AFL-CIO.
  In addition to being an important union leader, Grace is a 
trailblazer in our community. As the first member of the AANHPI 
community to serve as an officer for Local 1107, she is an important 
representative for one of Nevadas fastest growing demographics. Grace 
has a particular dedication to developing and supporting worker 
leaders, especially workers of color in her leadership with SEIU Local 
1107 and the Nevada AFL-CIO.
  Grace often says that she will always be an organizer at heart, so I 
am confident that her retirement will not be the last that I see of 
her.
, please join me today in honoring Grace Vergara-Mactal on 
her outstanding service to Nevada and our Nation, and in congratulating 
Grace on her retirement.
I rise today to honor a 
tenacious and selfless leader, Mr. Louis Johnson. He has shown what can 
be done through hard work, dedication, and a desire to make a 
difference.
, affectionally known as ``Bay Bay, is the winner 
of the first annual Mississippi Sports Hall of Fame Bill Hetrick 
Community Service Award. The Bill Hetrick Community Service Award is 
named after Bill Hetrick, who served as a long-time board member and 
Past President of the Mississippi Sports Foundation, Inc.
, the former Chief of Police in Edwards, Mississippi for 
39 years, parlayed his love of sports into coaching youth baseball and 
softball. He was able to coach while also giving the children in his 
community a positive role model to follow. When the number of kids 
playing baseball started to dwindle, Mr. Johnson started coaching 
basketball, and, at one point he was coaching 6 different teams at the 
same time. He has been a great asset to his community, and his work 
never goes unnoticed.
  The Mississippi Sports Hall of Fame will honor Louis Johnson for his 
lifetime commitment to his community with this award during its annual 
Hall of Fame Induction Banquet, set for Saturday, July 29, at the 
Jackson Convention Complex.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in recognizing Mr. Louis 
Johnson for his dedication and hard work in caring for the constituents 
in the State of Mississippi.
I rise today to honor the ten 
inventors who have been selected as the 2023 Inductees to the Florida 
Inventors Hall of Fame. To be named as an Inductee, these inventors 
were nominated by their peers nationwide and have undergone a thorough 
review by the Florida Inventors Hall of Fame Selection Committee. As a 
result, their innovations have been identified as significantly 
impacting the quality of life, economic development, and welfare of 
their communities, the residents of Florida, and the United States.
  The Florida Inventors Hall of Fame was founded in 2013 at the 
University of South Florida. It was recognized by the Florida Senate 
with Senate Resolution 1756, adopted on April 30, 2014. Its mission is 
to encourage individuals of all backgrounds to strive toward the 
betterment of Florida and society through continuous, groundbreaking 
innovation by celebrating the incredible scientific work that has been, 
or is being, accomplished in Florida and by its citizens.
  Nomination to the Florida Inventors Hall of Fame is open to all 
Florida inventors (living or deceased) who are or have been residents 
of Florida. The nominee must be a named inventor on a patent issued by 
the United States Patent and Trademark Office. The impact of the 
inventor and his or her invention should be significant to society, and 
the invention should have been commercialized, utilized, or led to 
important innovations.
  The 2023 Inductees constitute the ninth class to be inducted into the 
Florida Inventors Hall of Fame. Their groundbreaking discoveries have 
transformed medicine and health care, computer technology and 
semiconductors, optics and photonics, communications, nuclear energy, 
and modern color technology. They collectively hold more than 1,100 
U.S. patents and come from across industry, academia, and government. 
Since its founding, the Florida Inventors Hall of Fame has inducted 68 
inventors, who collectively hold over 5,100 U.S. patents.
, on behalf of my neighbors in Tampa Bay and the residents 
of Florida, I am proud to honor the 2023 Inductees to the Florida 
Inventors Hall of Fame on this outstanding achievement. We are 
incredibly grateful to these innovators for their contributions to 
society and its constant revolutionization through their inventions. As 
the following ten inventors are inducted into the Florida Inventors 
Hall of Fames growing community, I hope this may encourage future 
generations to strive toward this achievement and to continue the 
spirit of discovery and innovation.
  The 2023 Inductees of the Florida Inventors Hall of Fame are:
  James L. Cairns: Founder and Executive Director of the Cairns 
Foundation, and CEO of Abyssal Systems, Inc., who is recognized for 
pioneering underwater electrical, fiber-optic connector technologies 
that allowed circuits to be successfully and seamlessly mated and de-
mated reliably within the harsh environment of the deep ocean thereby 
revolutionizing subsea surveillance, anti-submarine warfare, and ocean 
energy production.
  Jason Eichenholz: Co-Founder and Chief Technology Officer of Luminar 
Technologies, who is recognized for trailblazing innovations in laser 
and optics-enabled technologies, especially in lidar (light detection 
and ranging) applications advancing the self-driving vehicle industry; 
as well as fundamental product development and commercialization for 
early

cancer detection, environmental studies, and military explosives 
detection, among others.
  David Flinchbaugh: CEO of Technology Applications International, and 
CTO of Advanced Medical Innovations, who is recognized for breakthrough 
technologies reducing fatalities from catheter-associated urinary tract 
infections affecting millions worldwide; developing the worlds first 
Nuclear Service Robot to help maintain, decontaminate, and refuel 
nuclear reactors; and devising the first imaging laser radar system.
  Ophir Frieder: Professor at Georgetown University Medical Centers 
Department of Biostatistics, Bioinformatics &amp; Biomathematics and the 
Department of Computer Science; Lead Science and Technology Advisor for 
Aurora Forge; and Chief Scientific Officer of Invaryant, Inc. He is 
recognized for sustained and extensive innovations in scalable 
information processing systems, especially for developing behavioral 
health monitoring used to prevent self-harm/suicide, and predictive 
medical and well-being treatment methods to optimize treatment 
effectiveness while reducing negative side effects.
  William Hauswirth: University of Florida Professor and the Maida and 
Morris Rybaczki Eminent Scholar Chair in Ophthalmic Sciences at the 
University of Floridas College of Medicine, who is recognized for 
groundbreaking advancements in gene therapy to prevent blindness, 
especially through pioneering the first gene therapy drug, Luxturna, to 
treat both adults and children with inherited retinal disease; as well 
as his work restoring vision to the functionally blind.
  Daniel Joseph: Principal Illusion Integrator at Walt Disney 
Imagineering, who is recognized for landmark innovations in industrial 
design, special effects, and the integration of three-dimensional 
illusions, creating immersive and interactive experiences for museums 
and theme parks, especially at Disney theme parks around the world.
  Jonathan Rothberg: Founder and Chair, 4 Catalyzer Corporation, who is 
recognized for pioneering next-generation human DNA sequencing that 
enables low-cost decoding of the human genome, which transformed life 
science research, healthcare, agriculture, and the development of 
biofuels; and for the revolutionary Swoop Portable Magnetic Resonance 
Imaging System making MRI accessible to every patient, regardless of 
income or resources.
  Deepika Singh: CEO of R&amp;D Investment Holdings and former CEO of 
Sinmat, Inc., who is recognized for seminal discoveries in chemical/
mechanical polishing of a class of super-hard semiconductors, 
significantly enabling the advancement of 5G communications 
infrastructure and defense electronics, as well as the manufacture of 
smartwatches, smartphones, and components for electric vehicles.
  Krishna ``Kris Singh: Founder, President and CEO of Holtec 
International, who is recognized for extensive transformational 
innovations that provide the foundational structure for modern nuclear 
power energy, including systems and equipment, safe storage, 
transportation of spent fuel; as well as improved operations, safety 
and efficiency of nuclear power plants.
  Gary K. Starkweather (Deceased): An American engineer who is 
recognized for inventing the worlds first laser printer and leading 
the frontier of the field of color management technology, including 
Apples ColorSync technology; as well as advancements in imaging for 
Microsoft and the film industry, especially as part of the digital 
effects team for the original Star Wars.
  Innovation and invention are the building blocks of our Nation. I 
applaud these highly accomplished individuals and the organizations 
that support them in their quest to change the world in ways that truly 
benefit humanity. It is because of the perseverance of these inventors 
that future generations are encouraged to reach beyond their limits and 
push the boundaries of innovation.
-DOVE. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to honor the life of 
Genevieve Ek, known as ``Jean by her beloved friends and family. Jean 
passed away last month after a life full of love, friendship, and 
kindness.
  She was born in Sheboygan, Wisconsin in December of 1941, growing up 
in Racine before moving to Two Harbors, Minnesota. She opted to stay in 
Two Harbors even after her family moved to Oregon because of the strong 
and lasting relationships she had built with her friends and the love 
of her life, Harold. Jean and Harold would go on to marry in 1963 and 
have 3 children--Adele, Lura, and John.
  Jean was well known during her career in medical administration, 
helping mentor dozens during her tenure as she worked diligently to 
advance from receptionist to Executive Director of Crossroads Medical 
Center.
  She is survived by her husband of 60 years, Harold, their 3 children, 
8 grandchildren, and 2 great-grandchildren.
  While Jean will be greatly missed by everyone who knew her, her 
legacy of leadership, kindness, and compassion remains.
  I am honored to commemorate the life of Jean Ek and wish her family 
and friends strength and peace in their grief.
I rise today to recognize heroic efforts 
on behalf of wildlife worldwide. American Humane, the first and most 
experienced national humane organization, which was created in 1877 to 
ensure the safety, welfare, and well-being of animals, has awarded 
Prof. Theo Pagel, CEO of the Cologne Zoo in Germany with the 2023 
Wolfgang Kiessling International Prize for Species Conservation. This 
award was created in honor of Wolfgang F. Kiessling, the founder of 
Loro Parque and global leader in conservation.
  Prof. Theo Pagel has dedicated his life to ensuring the survival of 
countless species, and inspiring and educating generations of people. 
As the CEO of the Cologne Zoo, the former president of the World 
Association of Zoos and Aquariums, and Chair of the Reverse the Red 
Committee of the International Union for Conservation of Nature, Pagel 
has led significant change for animals both in the wild and in zoos. He 
was inspired at an early age by his father, also an animal lover, and 
started a breeding program in 1988 to save the endangered Bali 
Starling--a program he coordinated for nearly 20 years.
  Pagel created sustainability strategies and guidelines for 
conservation education during his tenure as president of the World 
Association of Zoos and Aquariums. He approaches conservation through 
inspiring the public as well as leading high-level strategies on saving 
countless species from the very largest Asian Elephant to the smallest 
Asian songbird.
  He has led a global charge to push back the effects of what 
scientists call a ``Sixth Mass Extinction, with up to one million 
species at risk of disappearing forever.
, wildlife conservationists put the world first, wildlife 
first, the future first. They dont seek a heros reward, a medal, or a 
prize. But they surely deserve it. Mr. Speaker, I ask today that we 
recognize the impact Theo Pagel has had on saving species, honor his 
work and acknowledge American Humanes Kiessling Prize as a way to 
shine a light on the important work of saving species for future 
generations to love.
PAYING TRIBUTE TO OUR NATIONS PRISONERS OF WAR AND THOSE WHO ARE 
                             of puerto rico
-COLON. Mr. Speaker, I rise to pay tribute to our 
Nations prisoners of war and those who are missing in action.
  ``Though not here, their sacrifice is not forgotten is the official 
phrase for the 2023 POW-MIA day that this year falls on September 15.
  These heartfelt words serve as a reminder that there still are 
families that hope for the safe return of their loved ones that are 
missing in action and the wellbeing of those who were prisoners of war. 
Among those whose sacrifice will not be forgotten are over 130 Missing 
in Action service members and almost half a dozen of former Prisoners 
of War from Puerto Rico.
  For Puerto Rican families, these words are more significant when we 
remember that families extend beyond the immediate relations of the 
spouse and children of the service member. The pain of the loss and the 
hope that the loved one will return to the ``familia spreads from the 
immediate nucleus into endless tree branches of the extended family. 
Conscious of this feeling it is important that we remember that while 
the missing served the Nation, hundreds of families miss them and plead 
that the sacrifice of their loved ones is not forgotten.
  Puerto Ricans who were called to serve in distant lands under the 
most difficult conditions sacrificed everything, convinced that by 
fighting for the freedom of others they were preserving and 
guaranteeing the freedom, prosperity and democracy of their loved ones 
and of our country. Inspired by these ideas they performed feats of 
courage that surprised their enemies and earned them the respect of 
their brothers in arms and the recognition of their superior commands, 
creating a legacy of service that is difficult to emulate.
  As time passes and the memory of the POW and MIA begin to fade, we 
run the risk of forgetting the sacrifice of the Missing in Action and 
the scars of their time as Prisoners of War. I encourage my 
congressional colleagues to make a solemn pledge to continually strive 
to never forget the honorable legacy of our POW and MIA and ensure that 
future generations never forget their sacrifice.
I rise to commend the passage of the MAHSA 
Act, which is an important step in holding the Iranian regime 
accountable for its continued oppression of its own people.
  However, we cannot ignore the Biden Administrations latest misstep 
in handing over $6 billion to Iran.
  Longstanding U.S. policy dictates that we do not negotiate with 
terrorists.
  Unfortunately, that is exactly what President Biden did with this 
payoff, enabling Iran to continue threatening the security of the free 
world.
  Ive introduced the bipartisan, bicameral Solidifying Iran Sanctions 
Act with Foreign Affairs Chairman McCaul.
  Our legislation will hold Iran accountable and prevent them from 
acquiring nuclear weapons. Iran poses a serious threat to global 
stability and peace.
  We need strength--not payoffs and appeasement--to deter future 
hostility from this rogue regime.
Im honored to recognize the 112th National 
Day of the Republic of China (Taiwan).
  I join all those celebrating this Day, memorializing the beginning of 
the Wuchang Uprising on October 10, 1911 that led to the collapse of 
the long-reigning imperial Qing Dynasty and foundation of the Republic 
of China on January 1, 1912.
  Chinese Americans are a vital, valued, and vibrant community not only 
in my legislative district, but throughout our United States. I wish 
them and all observing this occasion, Godspeed, and a safe, happy, and 
momentous celebration.
, on behalf of Pennsylvanias 10th Congressional District, 
Im privileged, humbled, and honored to commemorate the 112th National 
Day of the Republic of China (Taiwan). May the friendship between our 
two Free Nations remain robust.
RECOGNIZING THE 45th ANNIVERSARY OF THE CONFERENCE OF WESTERN WAYNE
I rise today to recognize the Conference 
of Western Wayne on the occasion of the 45th anniversary of their 
founding. The services that they have provided to 18 different 
communities in Western Wayne County are worthy of commendation.
  The Conference of Western Wayne was created in 1978 to help integrate 
the local governments of Western Wayne County. Encompassing 18 
communities, 340 square miles and over 730,000 residents, the CWW 
coordinates 911 services and projects for the residents of Western 
Wayne. CWW also represents its 730,000 residents by meeting monthly to 
discuss issues such as transportation, public safety, community and 
economic development, the environmental health of the region, and 
legislation. The conference is constantly strategizing on potential 
legislation at the federal, state, and local level that impacts the 
communities of the conference. This constant discussion allows for the 
conference to identify areas where their communities can work together 
and support each other.
  In 2016, the CWW was the first 911 Service District in Wayne County 
to implement Text to 911, a service that has done wonders for those who 
are deaf, mute, or those for whom English isnt their first language. 
On top of their 911 responsibilities, the CWW is also well involved in 
the communities they represent. The CWW oversees the Rescue Recovery 
project in partnership with Growth Works and Trinity Health to provide 
substance use services to those in need, with a primary focus on opioid 
abuse. Last year, the Western Wayne Rescue Recovery program met with 
over 1,100 clients, providing support through face-to-face and 
telehealth meetings, as well as coordinating services with healthcare 
providers and the court system. CWW also partners with local Youth 
Assistance Programs to help provide families and youth within the CWW 
region with the knowledge and skills to make healthy choices.
, I ask my colleagues to join me today in celebrating the 
achievements of the Conference of Western Wayne over the last 45 years. 
With the support of the CWW, the residents of Western Wayne County have 
had better response times to emergencies and have had access to a 
plethora of programs to enhance their daily life. We thank the CWW for 
all the support they provide to our Western Wayne communities and hope 
to see another 45 years of tremendous service to those in need.
I rise today to recognize the Consulate of 
Mexico in Fresno on the 213th Anniversary of the Independence of Mexico 
and thank them for their significant contributions to the Central 
Valley.
  The Consulate of Mexico in Fresno opened in 1931 to support the needs 
of Mexican agricultural workers located in the Central Valley. The 
mission of the consulate is to help Mexican citizens assimilate into 
the community and advance their rights while residing in California. 
For nearly a century, those working in the consulate have been 
dedicated to that mission, providing invaluable assistance to local 
immigrants including identification services, health guidance, and 
educational opportunities. The consulate connects local immigrants with 
the services they need to thrive.
  Through their Mobile Consulate, which travels to different cities 
across the Central Valley throughout the year, Mexican immigrants have 
greater access to the over 30 services the consulate provides. The 
consulate is also focused on the educational outcomes of Mexican 
students.
  Last year alone, the consulate, in partnership with other local 
organizations, granted more than $45,000 in scholarships to 30 college 
students pursuing careers in public health. On this day, as we 
celebrate the independence of the Mexican people, I want to recognize 
the incredible contributions Mexican immigrants have made to our 
communities in the Central Valley and across the nation. As the son of 
immigrants, I understand first-hand the perseverance, determination, 
and sacrifice of immigrants who come to the United States in search of 
greater opportunities.
, I ask my colleagues in the United States House of 
Representatives to join me in celebrating the 213th Anniversary of the 
Independence of Mexico and thanking the Consulate of Mexico in Fresno 
for their dedication to the well-being of our Mexican community.
I rise today in recognition of the life of 
Michael C. Hayes.
  Born on August 23, 1950, Michael was raised in Scituate, 
Massachusetts by his parents, Miriam and Robert Hayes. He attended 
Thayer Academy in Braintree and graduated from Boston College and 
Suffolk Law School. Infected with polio in 1955, Michael lived the 
remainder of his life in leg braces, serving as an inspiration to all 
and guiding his lifelong commitment to working for tolerance and 
acceptance of all people.
  After graduating from law school in 1975, Michael, a third-generation 
lawyer, practiced law alongside his brother, Joe, and his cousin, John, 
and later went on to serve as an Assistant District Attorney for 
Plymouth County. After a short time in California, Michael returned to 
his hometown to practice law on Front Street in Scituate Harbor. 
Throughout his legal career, he always sought to help those in need. 
Not only did Michael establish himself as a pillar of the community 
through his work as an attorney, but he was also a devoted public 
servant.
  First elected to the Scituate School Committee in 1988 in the wake of 
Proposition 2\1/2\ budget cuts, Michael proudly served Scituates 
students until choosing not to run for re-election in 1994. He was 
recognized by the Scituate Town Meeting in 1995 for his ``his untiring 
and diligent efforts to secure the funding necessary to support and 
maintain excellence in public education despite pressing economic 
constraints. Michael returned to the school committee in 1998 and 
oversaw the construction of the new Jenkins School and an extensive 
renovation of Scituate High School and championed the funding for 
programs dear to him, including the arts and the METCO program. In 
2014, Michael chose not to seek re-election and took a step back to 
concentrate on his health. Ever committed to Scituates schools, 
Michael returned once more, beginning his third tenure on the School 
Committee in 2016, which saw the opening of the new Gates School in 
2017. Michael won his tenth and final term on the School Committee in 
2019.
  Sadly, Michael left us too soon on August 21, 2023, leaving behind 
his children Patrick, Lucy, and Fred, and his five granddaughters, 
Chelsea, Lena, June, Iris, and Willow. Michael was predeceased by his 
daughter Heidi Rose.
, I am proud to honor the life of Michael Hayes, and I ask 
that my colleagues

join me in recognizing his lifes commitment to serving his town and 
community.
I rise today in appreciation for a member 
of my staff for her dedicated service to the people of Kansas. Monet 
Straub has been an invaluable member of my team since she joined my 
staff in 2017 when I was still serving as State Treasurer. Monet has 
worked tirelessly as my Deputy District Director for the past 2\1/2\ 
years--helping thousands of Kansans from across the Second 
Congressional District navigate our federal agencies through high-
quality and reliable constituent services.
  From organizing the Topeka office to running Mobile office hours, 
Monets dedication, patience, and hard work have been vital in ensuring 
the success of our district operation. Most importantly, Monet always 
put our constituents first and Kansans knew they could count on her to 
get the job done. I am grateful for Monets positive attitude and 
dedication to service over these past 6 years. I wish her the very best 
and look forward to seeing her excel in her new endeavors.