I rise today to celebrate the life and 
service of Mr. Matthew Logan Finke of Bells, Texas, who peacefully 
passed away on September 25, 2024.
27, 1987, in Denison, Texas. He attended 
Denison High School and graduated from Austin College in 2010 with a 
bachelors degree in business, where he was a star athlete and captain 
of its football and baseball teams. In his outstanding football career, 
-Conference 
performer, Conference Player of the week, and the National Defensive 
Back of the week. He also earned the Shellie Hersch Special Teams 
Player of the Year and was named the Duke Babb Most Outstanding Player 
as a senior. Upon graduating, Mr. Finke heeded the call to serve his 
nation and joined the United States Army to serve as an Orthopedic 
Technician. In 2019, he deployed to Iraq in support of Operation 
Inherent Resolve as the Movement and Security Non-Commissioned Officer 
In-Charge.
a battlefield promotion for his contributions to 
the war effort against terrorist forces in this operation and also 
earned his Air Assault Badge, German Armed Forces Proficiency Badge in 
Gold, and Norwegian Ruck March Badge. Moreover, Mr. Finke won first 
place in the 13th Expeditionary Sustainment Command NCO of the Year 
Best Warrior Competition, out of a cadre of 6,000 soldiers. Outside of 
his Army duties, Mr. Finke was a devoted husband to his wife, Chelsey, 
and a father to three beautiful daughters. He was an uplifting leader 
who enjoyed playing football with kids in his neighborhood and his Army 
buddies. You could always count on Mr. Finke to be there and push you 
to be better than you were yesterday, both physically and mentally. His 
legacy of compassion, integrity, and friendship will always be 
remembered.
  I have requested the United States flag be flown over our Nations 
Capitol to recognize Mr. Finkes incredible life and service to our 
Nation. He will be dearly missed by his friends, family, and all who 
knew him.
I rise today to honor 
Graphics Universal of Greencastle, Pennsylvania, for 60 years of 
success as a leading provider of diversified design and commercial 
printing services.
  A family-owned business, Graphics Universal has distinguished itself 
with an inspiring corporate philosophy that was established by Gary and 
Nancy Gembe when they purchased the company in 1970.
  That philosophy is based on treating clients as long-term partners, 
fostering a rewarding work experience for staff, adhering to the 
highest standards of integrity and maintaining respect for the 
environment. Gary and Nancys son Garon Gembe proudly expands upon 
their legacy of achievement as Company President.
  Effectively employing a relationship-centered approach with all 
stakeholders, the team at Graphics Universal prides itself on a 
commitment to collaboration, open communication and trusted service.
  On behalf of everyone in the 13th Congressional District, I 
congratulate the entire Gembe family on their companys milestone and 
offer best wishes for continued success.
Bobby Beagles diligently served the 
agriculture community throughout his career. Agricultural issues were 
always better served with Bobby as an advocate at the county, state, 
and national levels.
  As a cattle rancher, Bobby early on recognized that ``what was good 
for all agriculture was good for his farm. in effect, he embraced the 
idea that ``all boats rise with the tide. As such, he embarked on a 
path of agricultural advocacy. Whether it be at a local community 
meeting or hundreds of county board meetings, Bobby was a voice to be 
reckoned with. He was unrelenting and tireless in representing 
agriculture.
  His legislative advocacy at all levels of government was never-
ending. It was no surprise when Bobby was asked to be then-Speaker of 
the Florida House of Representatives Tom Feeneys agricultural liaison. 
He carried that privilege and honor to Washington, D.C., when Speaker 
Feeney became Congressman Feeney.
  Bobbys heart was always about the youth--from the earliest days of 
buying animals at the county fair to timelessly encouraging auto 
dealerships and any number of businesses to purchase the kids market 
livestock project. On a not-to-be-ignored side note, at the request of 
then-Orange County Mayor Teresa Jacobs, Bobby was asked to rewrite the 
livestock section of the zoning laws. These laws today allow FFA and 4H 
to house some of their agriculture projects at home.
  His work with the youth led to numerous awards from the local FFA 
chapters as well as the state and national associations. He was honored 
to be awarded the Honorary Florida State FFA Degree and the American 
FFA Degree. In addition to those accolades, he was inducted into the 
Florida 4-H Hall of Fame.
  Bobby served as Orange County Farm Bureau executive director for 13 
years. Prior to that, he was a board member for 17 years. His work in 
this capacity has made him ``Mr. Agriculture in our area of the 
state.
  In 2007, Bobby received the prestigious Jefferson Award. This award 
is given to an individual who has devoted their life to exceptional 
public service in any arena. He was nominated for this award by then-
Orange County Mayor Rich Crotty and Orange County Extension. This 
represented a body of work that included procuring $12 million for the 
construction of a new extension office in Orange County.
  This refrain is consistent with Bobby Beagles character. In 2002, 
Bobby was awarded the Friend of Extension Award from Epsilon Sigma Phi 
State. This award traditionally recognizes individuals who have been 
true Friends of Extension. A year after receiving the Jefferson Award, 
Bobby received the Florida Farm Bureaus Distinguished Service Award. 
The award honors Florida agriculturalists for their overall 
contributions to farming at the local or state level.
  Bobby Beagles was married to Vickie Beagles and had a son, Thomas 
Beagles, a daughter, Rachel Kelly, and five grandchildren.
I rise today to honor Mr. Roosevelt Brown, 
an outstanding member of our community who has served the youth in San 
Diego for more than 40 years.
, 
attending Logan Elementary School, Memorial Junior High School, and San 
Diego High School. At a young age, Mr. Brown struggled with a speech 
impediment that hindered his academic progress. He feared being called 
on by teachers to read or speak aloud due to his stutter. It is this 
limitation that inspired his community work.
, and in his thirties, he decided to take classes at 
the University of Redlands and San Diego City College. These courses 
nurtured a newfound passion for reading. He decided to channel this 
passion into community work, with a goal to make sure children didnt 
have to wait as long as he did to discover the joys of reading. He knew 
that reading opened doors to learning and confidence.
``Childrens Book Party in his backyard, aiming 
for every child to form a collection of books. The books covered a 
variety of subjects including math, science, short stories, and novels. 
His continued dedication expanded the program to the Education Cultural 
Complex and then the Organ Pavilion in Balboa Park. His book parties 
have come to fruition through the nonprofit he founded 35 years ago, 
``Reading Literacy Learning, Inc.
During the 
COVID-19 pandemic, he still delivered books to schools. His efforts 
have proven fruitful as his nonprofit has distributed over a million 
books to children in the San Diego Community.
, 
with the support of his wife aiding in the success of his nonprofit, 
and his children recently taking over the operations of his book 
parties.
52nd District Constituent of the Month 
in February 2025, when Black History Month was celebrated, for his 
dedication to providing learning opportunities to the youth of San 
Diego, which will undoubtably impact generations to come.
I rise today to honor the legacy of Mr. Lue 
N. Yang, an extraordinary advocate, organizer, teacher, and public 
figure.
  Born on April 10, 1955, in Xieng Khouang, Laos, Mr. Yang has been a 
pillar for the Hmong community. At the age of 14, he served with the 
Hmong Special Guerrilla Unit (SGU) during Vietnam. After serving with 
the SGU, Mr. Yang moved to Vientiane to continue his education. Upon 
graduating, he became a Peace Officer for the US Embassy from 1972 to 
1975. Shortly after, Mr. Yang fled to Thailand as many Hmong refugees 
did at the end of the Vietnam War.
  A year later in Hawaii, he began to work with the non-profit: 
Vietnamese Indochinese Volunteer Agency (VIVA) and the Department of 
Labor as an agent. A few years later, Mr. Yang moved to Des Moines, 
Iowa and worked for Volunteer Enrichment Services. In 1991, he moved to 
Fresno and worked briefly with the Lao Family Community of Fresno.
  In 1992, Mr. Yang began his work at the Fresno Center for New 
Americans, a local non-profit that serves the Southeast Asian 
Community. Later that year he served as the Executive Director for FCNA 
from 1992 to 2017. Under Mr. Yangs leadership, FCNA managed to grow 
fourteen programs with an annual budget of $6.8 million and a team of 
38. As an Executive Director, he was seen as a role model and mentor by 
many young Hmong professionals at FCNA, who continued to push for 
progress for the Hmong community.
  Furthermore, during Mr. Yangs tenure at FCNA he was able to 
establish several key sustainable programs. The Living Well was the 
first Hmong mental health program in the state that provided culturally 
competent mental health services. Mr. Yang also drafted an Adult Day 
Health Care program that provided essential support for senior 
community members. These two programs are still in operation today and 
are seen as the pillars of FCNAs work.
41 
years. He has worked collaboratively with non-profits, community 
leaders, elected officials, and educational institutions to address the 
disparities, challenges, and stigma that the Southeast Asian 
communities face. Mr. Yangs work via his community partnerships and 
advocacy resulted in the hiring of the first Hmong detective in the 
Fresno Police Department, and Hmong representation in administration 
and other leadership positions within the Fresno Unified School 
District.
  He was also instrumental in helping Hmong refugees who were attending 
school, manage their transition. Mr. Yang helped secure funding for a 
group that went to Wat Tham Krabok, Thailand, the location of the last 
recognized Hmong refugee group. After assessing different challenges 
unique to the Hmong refugee population, including access to education, 
the group published its findings to the City and County of Fresno, as 
well as the State Refugee Office. This was what culminated with the 
creation of the New American School, which assisted Hmong student 
refugees as they transitioned into mainstream school.
  The work of Mr. Yang has given the Hmong community immense support 
over the years and without this work many of these accomplishments 
wouldnt have been possible.
, I invite my esteemed colleagues to join me in honoring 
the legacy of Lue N. Yang. He will be greatly missed by all who knew 
and loved him.
I rise today on missed votes from April 8, 
2025. Had I been present, I would have voted YEA on Roll Call No. 91.
I rise today to recognize Alexya 
Sandoval-Perez for earning the Arvada Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors 
for Youth Award.
  Alexya has overcome many challenges along her journey to success, 
demonstrating perseverance at every step. Students who strive to make 
the most of their education, like Alexya, develop crucial skills and a 
work ethic that will guide them for the rest of their lives. This award 
is a testament to Alexyas hard work, determination, and perseverance 
at Drake Middle School and is clearly just the beginning of a bright 
and promising future.
  It is my honor to congratulate Alexya Sandoval-Perez on achieving the 
Arvada Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth award.
RECOGNIZING BELLEVUE HIGH SCHOOL WINNING THE DIVISION IV STATE GIRLS 
                                of ohio
it is with a great deal of pride that I rise 
to pay a very special tribute to an outstanding high school basketball 
team in Ohios Fifth Congressional District. The young women of the 
Bellevue High School girls basketball team have represented their 
school ably on their way to achieving the Division IV State Girls 
Basketball Title. In their effort to surpass all other teams in the 
Division IV State Basketball Playoffs, the Bellevue Redmen overcame the 
challenges posed by intense competition.
  In pursuing the State Championship, the Bellevue Lady Redmen defeated 
the Kettering Archbishop Alter Knights to win their first state 
basketball championship. The members of this very special team have 
shown that their sport requires an individual effort for a team result. 
Their hard work and dedication, both on and

off the court, in achieving this accomplishment, is truly outstanding.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in paying special tribute 
to the Bellevue High School girls basketball team. On behalf of the 
people of the Fifth District of Ohio, I am proud to recognize this 
great achievement.
I rise today to recognize Cristian 
Guillen-Reyes for earning the Arvada Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors 
for Youth Award.
  Cristian has overcome many challenges along his journey to success, 
demonstrating perseverance at every step. Students who strive to make 
the most of their education, like Cristian, develop crucial skills and 
a work ethic that will guide them for the rest of their lives. This 
award is a testament to Cristians hard work, determination, and 
perseverance at Everitt Middle School and is clearly just the beginning 
of a bright and promising future.
  It is my honor to congratulate Cristian Guillen-Reyes on achieving 
the Arvada Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth Award.
I rise today to recognize Isabella Ekman 
for earning the Arvada Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth Award.
  Isabella has overcome many challenges along her journey to success, 
demonstrating perseverance at every step. Students who strive to make 
the most of their education, like Isabella, develop crucial skills and 
a work ethic that will guide them for the rest of their lives. This 
award is a testament to Isabellas hard work, determination, and 
perseverance at Excel Academy and is clearly just the beginning of a 
bright and promising future.

  It is my honor to congratulate Isabella Ekman on achieving the Arvada 
Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth Award.
I rise today to recognize Margaret Peterson, 
a dedicated public servant and respected leader in West Valley City.
  Margaret served on the city council for 18 years, always putting 
families and students first. She is also the founder and Executive 
Director of the Community Education Partnership, a nonprofit that 
supports afterschool programs across the city.
  Under her leadership, the program has reached over 15,000 students 
from 20 elementary schools, four junior highs, one high school, and 
several charter schools. It has helped improve academic outcomes, 
encouraged stronger attendance, and given students a safe place to 
grow.
  In 2024, West Valley City honored Margaret with the ``Essential 
Piece award--a heartfelt recognition of her decades of service and 
the lives shes touched through education and community building.
  Her example is one we should all aspire to.
I rise today to congratulate the Olympus High 
School Titans on winning the 5A Boys Basketball State Championship.
  With a commanding 69 to 40 win over Highland High, the Titans capped 
off a season defined by discipline, grit, and teamwork. This 
championship reflects the hours of practice, the leadership of their 
coaches, and the drive of a team that refused to let up.
  I also want to give a special shout-out to three players from the 
Millcreek area--Luke Owen, Jack Evan, and Malakai Philip--whose efforts 
on the court made a lasting impact.
  Their hard work, and the hard work of the entire team, has brought 
pride to their school and to our entire community.
  Congratulations again to the Titans on an outstanding season and a 
well-earned title.
I rise today to recognize an extraordinary 
team of hardworking Utahns who brought home a world

title--Team Utah from Papa Johns, winners of the 2025 Global Pizza 
Games.
  Out of more than 6,000 locations worldwide, this locally owned and 
operated franchise in West Jordan achieved something thats never been 
done before in our state. Competing against teams from Peru, the UK, 
South Korea, the UAE, and across the United States, they earned first 
place with unmatched precision, speed, and teamwork, setting a record 
time of 8 minutes and 33 seconds while producing four near-perfect 
pizzas, each scoring an impressive 9.9 out of 10.
  Behind this victory are three standout individuals: Nicole Brock, a 
25-year veteran and general manager in American Fork; Benny Loughton, 
her assistant manager; and Phillip Newson, their coach and motivator. 
Their dedication, discipline, and belief in excellence showcase the 
best of Utahs work ethic and spirit.
, their victory is a testament to whats possible when 
local businesses invest in people, when teams lead with pride, and when 
hard work meets opportunity.
  Congratulations to Team Utah, our Global Pizza Champions. They have 
made us proud.
I rise today to reflect on the profound 
responsibility that accompanies public service.
  As public officials across the country are sworn into office, each 
affirms a commitment to faithfully execute the duties of public office 
and defend the Constitution of the United States. But more and more 
Americans are losing faith that the actions of our public officials are 
principally guided by our Constitution and our laws. And some of my 
colleagues even doubt whether truth exists and whether government can 
operate on the basis of mutually agreed facts, such as who won an 
election.
  Gregory Mize--a Georgetown University law professor and retired trial 
judge--offers a compelling perspective: we can use jury trials as 
models for attaining higher levels of truthfulness and reliable 
outcomes in government. After all, our whole justice system is based on 
the idea that we must all tell the truth and the fact-finder can decide 
``beyond a reasonable doubt or ``by preponderance of the evidence 
what actually happened.
  Thomas Jefferson said, ``I consider trial by jury as the only anchor, 
yet ever imagined by man, by which a government can be held to the 
principles of its constitution. Indeed, the way a courtroom pursues 
truth provides a blueprint for encouraging trustworthiness in our 
public servants.
  At the beginning of jury selection, potential jurors take a solemn 
oath to truthfully answer questions posed by the judge and lawyers. The 
selected jurors take a second oath to ``faithfully discharge the duties 
of a juror and a true verdict render according to the law and the 
evidence. When testimony begins, jurors observe each witness take an 
oath under penalty of perjury to ``tell the truth and nothing but the 
truth. Judges, also sworn to follow the law, enforce rules of 
evidence--including by striking irrelevant or unreliable testimony from 
consideration by the jury. In some cases, judges must also pre-qualify 
proposed experts before they can state an opinion on a key issue. A 
lawyers questioning then further tests the reliability of those 
opinions. Thanks to these established procedures, jurors learn the 
courts high valuation of honesty and come to expect it from their 
government
  Rather than relying on a single robed jurist to render a final 
verdict, our Founders wanted a panel of common citizens to administer 
justice in honest dialogue with one another. They believed jury 
deliberations to be a gold standard for reaching truth and achieving 
just ends.
  After hearing evidence and receiving legal instructions from the 
judge, jurors enter a deliberation room. They test one anothers 
recollections and assumptions and assess witness credibility. Studies 
show that, during deliberations, a jury polices itself. Individual 
jurors remind others of the obligations of their oaths and the 
requirements of the law as stated by the judge.
  As a new year--with a new Congress and President--is underway, it is 
high time to bring courtroom reverence for truth-telling into the 
government generally and the public square. As citizens, we must demand 
a commitment to the pursuit of truth from all of our public officials. 
While enforcing oaths of office is a big challenge, citizens must 
demand truth from public officials in all that we do. And as public 
officials, we must earn that trust by honoring our oaths.
  The work of Judge Gregory Mize is exemplary in calling America back 
to the bedrock quest for truth. We owe him a debt of gratitude.