Title IV of Senate Resolution 4, agreed to by the Senate of February 
4, 1977, calls for establishment of a system for a computerized 
schedule of all meetings and hearings of Senate committees, 
subcommittees, joint committees, and committees of conference. This 
title requires all such committees to notify the Office of the Senate 
Daily Digest--designated by the Rules Committee--of the time, place and 
purpose of the meetings, when scheduled and any cancellations or 
changes in the meetings as they occur.
  As an additional procedure along with the computerization of this 
information, the Office of the Senate Daily Digest will prepare this 
information for printing in the Extensions of Remarks section of the 
Congressional Record on Monday and Wednesday of each week.
  Meetings scheduled for Tuesday, May 13, 2025 may be found in the 
Daily Digest of todays Record.

                                 MAY 14
     9:30 a.m.
       Committee on Energy and Natural Resources
         Business meeting to consider the nominations of William 
           L. Doffermyre, of Texas, to be Solicitor of the 
           Department of the Interior, and Catherine Jereza, of 
           Maryland, to be an Assistant Secretary (Electricity), 
           and Kyle Haustveit, of Oklahoma, to be an Assistant 
           Secretary (Fossil Energy), both of the Department of 
           Energy; to be immediately followed by a hearing to 
           examine the nominations of Jonathan Brightbill, of 
           Virginia, to be General Counsel, Tina Pierce, of Idaho, 
           to be Chief Financial Officer, and Conner Prochaska, of 
           Texas, to be Director of the Advanced Research Projects 
           Agency--Energy, all of the Department of Energy, and 
           Ned Mamula, of Pennsylvania, to be Director of the 
           United States Geological Survey, Department of the 
           Interior.
                                                            SD-366
     9:45 a.m.
       Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation
         Business meeting to consider the nomination of Paul 
           Dabbar, of New York, to be Deputy Secretary of 
           Commerce.
                                                            SR-253
     10 a.m.
       Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation
         To hold hearings to examine FAA reauthorization one year 
           later, focusing on aviation safety, air traffic, and 
           next generation technology.
                                                            SR-253
       Committee on Finance
         To hold hearings to examine trade in critical supply 
           chains.
                                                            SD-215
     10:30 a.m.
       Committee on Appropriations
       Subcommittee on Department of Interior, Environment, and 
           Related Agencies
         To hold hearings to examine proposed budget estimates for 
           fiscal year 2026 for the Environmental Protection 
           Agency.
                                                            SD-124
       Committee on Environment and Public Works
         To hold hearings to examine the nominations of Sean 
           McMaster, of Virginia, to be Administrator of the 
           Federal Highway Administration, Department of 
           Transportation, John Busterud, of California, to be 
           Assistant Administrator, Office of Solid Waste, 
           Environmental Protection Agency, and Adam Telle, of 
           Mississippi, to be an Assistant Secretary of the Army, 
           Department of Defense.
                                                            SD-562
     1:30 p.m.
       Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions
         To hold hearings to examine the Presidents proposed 
           budget request for fiscal year 2026 for the Department 
           of Health and Human Services.
                                                            SD-430
     2:30 p.m.
       Committee on the Judiciary
       Subcommittee on Intellectual Property
         To hold hearings to examine foreign threats to American 
           innovation and economic leadership.
                                                            SD-226
       Committee on Small Business and Entrepreneurship
         To hold hearings to examine financing Americas 
           manufacturing and industrial boom.
                                                           SR-428A
       Select Committee on Intelligence
         To receive a closed briefing on certain intelligence 
           matters.
                                                            SH-219
     3 p.m.
       Committee on Appropriations
       Subcommittee on Legislative Branch
         To hold hearings to examine proposed budget estimates for 
           fiscal year 2026 for the Senate Sergeant at Arms and 
           United States Capitol Police.
                                                            SD-192
     3:30 p.m.
       Committee on Indian Affairs
         To hold oversight hearings to examine delivering 
           essential public health and social services to Native 
           Americans, focusing on Federal programs serving Native 
           Americans across the operating divisions at the 
           Department of Health and Human Services.
                                                            SD-628
       Special Committee on Aging
         To hold hearings to examine preparing for disasters, 
           focusing on unique challenges facing older Americans.
                                                            SD-106

                                 MAY 15
     9:30 a.m.
       Committee on Armed Services
         To hold hearings to examine the Department of Defense 
           responsibilities related to Foreign Military Sales 
           system and international armaments cooperation.
                                                            SD-G50
       Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions
         Business meeting to consider the nomination of Janet 
           Dhillon, of Virginia, to be Director of the Pension 
           Benefit Guaranty Corporation.
                                                            SD-430
     10 a.m.
       Committee on Appropriations
       Subcommittee on Transportation, Housing and Urban 
           Development, and Related Agencies
         To hold hearings to examine proposed budget estimates for 
           fiscal year 2026 for the Department of Transportation.
                                                            SD-192
       Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation
       Subcommittee on Surface Transportation, Freight, Pipelines, 
           and Safety
         To hold hearings to examine pipeline safety 
           reauthorization, focusing on ensuring the safe and 
           efficient movement of American energy.
                                                            SR-253
     10:15 a.m.
       Committee on the Judiciary
         Business meeting to consider S. 180, to amend the Omnibus 
           Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 to authorize 
           the use of grant amounts for providing training and 
           resources for first responders on the use of 
           containment devices to prevent secondary exposure to 
           fentanyl and other potentially lethal substances, and 
           purchasing such containment devices for use by first 
           responders, S. 237, to amend the Omnibus Crime Control 
           and Safe Streets Act of 1968 to provide public safety 
           officer benefits for exposure-related cancers, S. 419, 
           to amend the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act 
           of 1968 to reauthorize grants to support law 
           enforcement officers and families, S. 539, to 
           reauthorize the PROTECT Our Children Act of 2008, S. 
           911, to amend the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe 
           Streets Act of 1968 to include certain retired law 
           enforcement officers in the public safety officers 
           death benefits program, S. 1316, to amend the Omnibus 
           Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 to provide 
           that COPS grant funds may be used for local law 
           enforcement recruits to attend schools or academies if 
           the recruits agree to serve in precincts of law 
           enforcement agencies in their communities, S. 1563, to 
           amend the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 
           1968 to establish a grant program to help law 
           enforcement agencies with civilian law enforcement 
           tasks, S. 1595, to establish standards for trauma kits 
           purchased using funds provided under the Edward Byrne 
           Memorial Justice Assistance Grant Program, and the 
           nomination of Jason Reding Quinones, of Florida, to be 
           United States Attorney for the Southern District of 
           Florida for the term of four years.
                                                            SH-216

     10:30 a.m.
       Committee on Foreign Relations
         Business meeting to consider pending calendar business; 
           to be immediately followed by a hearing to examine 
           certain pending nominations.
                                                            SD-419

                                 MAY 20
     9:30 a.m.
       Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
         To hold hearings to examine the Presidents proposed 
           budget request for fiscal year 2026 for the Department 
           of Homeland Security.
                                                            SD-342
     10 a.m.
       Committee on Foreign Relations
         To hold hearings to examine the Presidents proposed 
           budget request for fiscal year 2026 for the Department 
           of State.
                                                            SD-419