I rise today to recognize Angelo Field 
for earning the Arvada Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth Award.
  Angelo has achieved great things, all while overcoming adversity and 
challenges along the way. Students like Angelo, who strive to make the 
most of their education, develop crucial skills and a work ethic that 
will guide them

for the rest of their lives. This award is a testament to Angelos hard 
work, determination, and perseverance at Jefferson Jr./Sr. High School 
and is clearly just the beginning of a bright and promising future.
  It is my honor to congratulate Angelo Field on achieving the Arvada 
Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth award.
I rise today to celebrate over 70 years of 
the Azteca Wedding Plaza as the Torrez family heads into retirement. 
Founded in 1950 by Adolfo and Kay Torrez, their children, 
grandchildren, and great grandchildren have kept the family business 
thriving over the decades.
  Family has been at the center of everything at Azteca. For 
generations, the Torrezes have proudly served Phoenix families through 
quinceaneras, weddings. and many other special moments. To be part of 
memorable occasions and serve their community has been their motivation 
and constant goal throughout the years.
  Prolific entrepreneurs, Adolfo and Kays first business was Mexican 
restaurant in downtown Phoenix. From there, they opened a bar, flower 
shop. furniture store, and eventually grew into Azteca Wedding Plaza--
an entire city block dedicated to the bridal industry. Azteca has been 
a mainstay in Phoenixs Latino community, providing a welcoming 
environment for generations of brides and grooms.
  Now, as a family, they have determined it is time to retire Azteca. 
Reaching this conclusion has not been easy, but their decision was 
fueled by one factor--family. Now, their plan is to spend more time 
with friends and family and to watch their community grow and prosper.
  I would like to congratulate the Torrez family on over 70 years of 
business and wish them all the best in their future endeavors.
I rise today to recognize and congratulate 
my friend David Whisenant on his retirement from WBTV after 32 years of 
service.
  David Whisenant started his news career at Salisbury-based radio 
station WSTP while in high school in 1976. He went on to attend 
Appalachian State University, earning degrees in both Political Science 
and English. Throughout his four years, he worked at a radio station in 
Boone, North Carolina. After graduation, David returned to Salisbury 
and started a full-time job at WSTP.
  When WBTV first created their bureau in Salisbury, David sent a 
handwritten letter to the news director expressing his interest in 
working for the station. David started at WBTV as a stringer and within 
a year was promoted to General Assignment Reporter.
  David would go on to provide coverage for Charlotte as well as 
Salisbury, Concord, and Kannapolis. In his words, he would go 
``wherever they send me. Some of Davids biggest stories include the 
Pillowtex/NC Research Campus developments, the tragic fire at Salisbury 
Millworks, the funeral of President Ronald Reagan, NASCAR-related 
stories, and coverage and updates of Hurricane Katrina. I think I speak 
for the whole of our community here in North Carolina in wishing David 
all the best as he begins this next chapter of life.
, please join me today in recognizing David Whisenants 
retirement from WBTV and his 32 years of service to the people of North 
Carolina.
today I rise to recognize the commitment 
of a devoted Central Washington public servant, Kevin Fuhr. Formerly 
the Chief of Police for Moses Lake, Chief Fuhr has concluded an 
illustrious 32-year career in law enforcement and is now ready to move 
on to the next chapter of his life.
  While other regions of Washington State had trouble hiring new police 
officers, Chief Fuhrs leadership drew people to Moses Lake Police 
Department in the pursuit of working underneath him. Chief Fuhrs force 
also spearheaded an exceptional outreach program, and his leadership on 
my Central Washington Fentanyl Taskforce has fostered a remarkable 
level of trust within our communities.
  When most folks retire, they look forward to all the spare time they 
will have. However, the call to public service continues to ring for 
Chief Fuhr, as he has recently been hired as the city manager of Moses 
Lake, underscoring his unwavering dedication to Central Washington.
  I have known Kevin for a long time, and I am proud to call him a dear 
friend, His leadership, integrity, and commitment to the prosperity of 
our region has resulted in a wonderful career with more than enough to 
show for it. It has been a pleasure working with him, and I am looking 
forward to continuing our collaboration in his new role.
I rise today to honor the life and legacy of 
Lilly Loise Culp Hogan. Lilly lived a life of adventure and at age 103 
was the oldest veteran at the Armed Forces Retirement Home in Gulfport, 
Mississippi. She was born on February 5, 1920, in Obion County, 
Tennessee, Lilly was the second youngest child of eleven children.
  Growing up during the Great Depression, Lilly learned the value of 
hard work by making clothes for all the children at home. She made her 
own patterns and designed her own clothing. Lilly had many siblings to 
look up to and who were a part of her life. Attending the local one-
room schoolhouse, Lilly was taught by her older sister Zora. Lilly 
loved math and was always competing with her classmates for the best 
grades. When she finished the eighth grade, Lilly attended high school 
at the local Dixie School. Having no car, Lilly and her brother Fred 
would walk to school every day, except on the rare day when her father 
would allow them to ride the horse. Fred and Lilly would stable the 
horse in the barn attached to the school while they did their studies. 
In 1938 Lilly graduated as valedictorian and Fred graduated with her 
the same year as salutatorian.
  After high school, Lilly wanted to attend college, but her family did 
not have the resources, so she started working. Lilly and her sister 
Kitty rented an apartment close to Union City, Tennessee, and together 
they worked at a nearby shirt factory. While working at the shirt 
factory, her landlord introduced Lilly to her cousin, Reed Hogan. Reed 
was on leave from the U.S. Navy.
  After Reed was sent back overseas on duty, Lilly was bored of the 
shirt factory and her life in Tennessee. On the lookout for more 
adventure, she moved to Wisconsin to join her brother Calvin learning 
the trade of photography. Lilly learned how to take photos, print them, 
and colorize the photos. With a new job and a new life, Lilly began to 
find her place in the world. While in Wisconsin, Lilly and Reed were 
constantly exchanging letters.
  As Lilly worked in the photography shop, many men and women would 
come in to take pictures for their Navy identification cards. Lilly saw 
them coming in with their nice Navy uniforms day-in and day-out. 
Feeling adventurous, Lilly decided to join the Navy, too. With her 
photography skills, she enlisted with the goal of becoming a war 
photographer. Encouraged by her brother to join, Lilly went off on a 
new adventure in Washington. D.C
  During the process of joining the Navy, it became clear that Lilly 
excelled at math and was pulled from the photography route and placed 
in a decoding role. Lilly had no idea what the future held, but she 
underwent investigation for a top security clearance.
  In Washington, D.C., the Pentagon had not been completed, and Lilly 
worked in an underground facility nearby. Lilly decoded enemy messages 
in Naval Intelligence. Her work was important to the war, and she knew 
it. She worked around the clock taking messages and typing them on a 
card to be slid into what was a very primitive and early version of the 
modern computer.
  In 1944, Reed came home wounded and made his way to Washington, D.C., 
to find Lilly. They were married on March 16, 1944, not many days after 
Reed returned.
  When the war ended, Lilly and Reed used the G.I. Bill to go to 
college. They attended the University of Tennessee together and both 
majored in business--Lilly in business education and Reed in business 
administration. Lilly and Reed were in some of the same classes and 
would compete against each other for the best grades. Lilly and Reed 
had four children--Mary Beth, Reed Jr., Jeannie, and Kim--and made 
their home in Mississippi.
  Later in life, Lilly moved into the Armed Forces Retirement Home in 
Gulfport, Mississippi. Keeping with her adventurous spirit, Lilly 
stayed at the facility while residents cleared out during Hurricane 
Katrina in 2005 stating she had never seen a hurricane. The water rose 
to the third story, and Lilly and several of the other residents had to 
be rescued.
  Lillys life legacy of adventure, courage, and bravery lives on in 
her four children, seven grandchildren, and fifteen great-
grandchildren. I am proud to honor the life of a woman who made an 
impact not just during World War II but throughout her entire life.
I include in the Record the following 
proclamation.
  Whereas: On November 25, 2023, hero firefighter Michael W. Daly of 
Staten Island succumbed to 9/11 related cancer.
  Whereas: Michael W. Daly, who was born on May 21, 1967, in Brooklyn, 
New York is the proud father to Mason, Madison, and Logan and loving 
husband to his wife Jessica.
  Whereas: Michael W. Daly courageously served as a firefighter with 
the New York Fire Departments Ladder 87 in Annadale, Staten Island, 
from 1999 to 2008.
  Whereas: Michael W. Daly bravely served the City of New York in the 
aftermath of the September 11th attacks at Ground Zero.
  Whereas: Due to his work at Ground Zero following the September 11th 
Attacks, sadly contracted two types of 9/11 related cancers.
  Whereas: After retiring from the FDNY, Michael W. Daly graciously 
continued to give back to his community by supporting various 
charitable causes. These include the March of Dimes, dedicated to 
saving premature babies, and the American Cancer Society, where he 
raised awareness of 9/11-related illnesses by serving as the keynote 
speaker at the 2015 Celebration of Hope Gala.
  Whereas: The people of the City of New York and Staten Island are 
thankful for his years of service to the community in the face of the 
worst attack on our nation.
  It is my sincere pleasure to honor the life and legacy of Michael W. 
Daly in recognition and grateful appreciation of his invaluable service 
to our community and country.
  Our Nation is forever indebted to him and offers its sincerest 
gratitude.
I rise today to honor the life of a 
remarkable individual, Jordan Morris Brandman. Jordan leaves behind a 
legacy defined by his unparallel commitment to the community he lived 
in for his entire life.
  Born in 1980 to Michael and Mara Brandman, Jordan was the youngest of 
five children and was raised in the City of Orange. After graduating 
from El Modena High School, he attended University of California, 
Irvine, where he majored in Political Science and was an early leader 
in the Orange County YoungDemocrats. Jordan interned and later worked 
in the California State Department of Education under both Governors 
Gray Davis and Arnold Schwarzenegger after his studies. It was during 
these years that he developed a passion for education issues.
  Jordan took his inspiring passion for education and public service 
and ran for the Anaheim Union High School District Board of Trustees, 
winning a seat on the board in 2008. As a Trustee, he led the effort to 
create a culturally competent curriculum that catered to the needs of 
the growing Latino working class community. He brought the seal of bi-
literacy to the school district and helped make resources accessible to 
students who were Dreamers.
  In 2012, Jordan won a seat on the Anaheim City Council during a 
turbulent period of change. Jordan also broke barriers when he came out 
as an LGBTQ councilman--the first openly gay Councilmember in Anaheim 
history--giving a voice to his community. He worked relentlessly to 
foster a feeling of community and provide opportunities for everybody 
by ensuring that the bridges he built reached the very core of our 
local communities.
  Jordan, in his professional life, showed a dedication to making 
connections between labor and business as the Vice President of Labor 
Relations at BIASC and the leader in workforce development for the 
Orange County Business Council. His sincere kindness and generosity 
extended beyond the public sphere, having a positive impact on those 
closest to him.
  Jordan is survived by his father Michael and stepmother Pam, as well 
as his four brothers, Jason, Joshua, Jake, and Jedidiah. He is now 
reunited in eternal rest with his mother, Mara Brandman, who he always 
held a special place in his heart for.
  I ask my colleagues to join me in celebrating and commemorating 
Jordan Morris Brandmans great career and contributions to our 
community.
I rise today to recognize Marielle Link 
for earning the Arvada Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth Award.
  Marielle has achieved great things, all while overcoming adversity 
and challenges along the way. Students like Marielle, who strive to 
make the most of their education, develop crucial skills and a work 
ethic that will guide them for the rest of their lives. This award is a 
testament to Marielles hard work, determination, and perseverance at 
Oberon Middle School and is clearly just the beginning of a bright and 
promising future.
  It is my honor to congratulate Marielle Link on achieving the Arvada 
Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth award.
I rise today to recognize Mickey Wilson 
of Golden, Colorado, for receiving a Carnegie Medal after saving his 
friends life in a daring act of heroism.
  In January 2017, Mr. Wilson, a professional slackliner, was skiing in 
Dillon, Colorado, when a friend and fellow skier got caught leaving a 
ski lift. The skier was left dangling unconscious from the lift, out of 
reach from help. Mr. Wilson realized the gravity of the situation and 
selflessly sprung into action. Despite danger warnings, he climbed the 
chairlift pole and traversed 30 feet along the lifts two-inch cable to 
reach the chair. He then swung down onto the chair and, after catching 
a knife thrown by a rescue crew member, cut his friend free. The skier 
fully recovered with only a broken rib, while Mr. Wilson was uninjured. 
-saving that day.
  The Carnegie Medal is given to people who risk their own safety in an 
attempt to save the lives of others. There is no doubt that Mr. Wilson 
is incredibly deserving of this award and it is an honor to 
congratulate him on this life-saving act of bravery.
due to an unforeseen scheduling conflict, I 
was unable to participate in the consideration of H. Res. 888 and H. 
Res. 793. Had I been present, I would have voted, YEA on Roll Call No. 
677, and YEA on Roll Call No. 676.
RECOGNIZING THE 75TH ANNIVERSARY OF ELBERON FIRST AID &amp; EMERGENCY SQUAD
I rise today to congratulate Elberon First 
Aid &amp; Emergency Squad on its 75th anniversary. The all-volunteer agency 
continues to provide exemplary service to residents and its work is 
truly deserving of this bodys recognition.
  Incorporated in 1948, Elberon First Aid &amp; Emergency Squad is a 501c4 
that does not bill for its services. Though the squad is responsible 
for financing most of its operations, including its medical supplies, 
equipment, and vehicles, it receives a small stipend through the city 
and is also supported by the community through donations and 
fundraisers.
  Responding to over 600 calls a year, Elberon First Aid &amp; Emergency 
Squad serves the residents of the Elberon section of Long Branch, but 
also provides backup for the entire city of Long Branch, West Long 
Branch, Deal, Allenhurst, Eatontown, Oceanport, Monmouth Beach, and Sea 
Bright. In addition to providing on-site support for local community 
events, including the large-scale NJ Marathon, Elberon First Aid &amp; 
Emergency Squad is on a Monmouth County EMS Strike Team and stands 
ready to assist in mass casualty incidents.
  First Responders and Emergency Medical Technicians play a vital role 
in our communities, providing quality care in a timely manner. The 
members of Elberon First Aid &amp; Emergency Squad volunteer their time and 
undergo rigorous training to support its neighbors. They are well-
trained, efficient, and compassionate, and they demonstrate true 
community service.
, I sincerely hope my colleagues will join me in marking 
this milestone. For 75 years, Elberon First Aid &amp; Emergency Squad has 
upheld its duty to serve the community and its dedication is to be 
celebrated.