I rise today to congratulate my constituent, 
Barb Hedstrom, as the recipient of the Congressional Crime Survivors 
and Justice Caucus 2024 Ed Stout Memorial Award for Outstanding Victim 
Advocacy. Barb Hedstrom serves as Shakopee Police Departments Victim 
and Community Services Coordinator.
  This awards honoree is a professional, volunteer or organization 
whose efforts directly benefit victims and survivors of crime. The 
award recognizes innovations in victim assistance and crime victim 
services in the areas of program development, public or agency policy 
development, community and public awareness, and collaboration among 
community and justice-based organizations that serve crime victims.
  Barb is exactly that. The Shakopee Police Department was the first 
police department in Minnesota to have a Victim Services Coordinator. 
In 2015, Barb worked with her colleagues to launch the Recovery 
Assistance Program (RAP), which helps those in recovery by providing 
scholarships to help break down barriers to treatment. Barb recently 
started the Law Enforcement Association of Victim Essential Services 
(LEAVES), which is a statewide professional association of law 
enforcement-based victim service providers. Due largely to Barbs work, 
the Shakopee Police Department has been a leader in the State of 
Minnesota and across the country for victims services for nearly a 
decade and has made victim services a top priority.
  It is an honor to represent Barb Hedstrom and the Shakopee Police 
Department in Congress. I look forward to our continued partnership in 
serving the Second District of Minnesota.
I rise today to congratulate the Mississippi 
State University (MSU) Veterans Business Outreach Center (VBOC) on 
being recognized as the 2024 Veterans Business Outreach Center of the 
Year.

Director Mark Scott has worked tirelessly to make the MSU VBOC a place 
where Veterans are served well. Natalie Rhode, the program director, 
has also played a key role in the centers success.
  The Veterans Business Outreach Center is focused on small business 
development for Veterans and their spouses. The center was founded in 
2015 and covers Alabama, Louisiana, and Mississippi.
  The Small Business Administration selected the MSU VBOC this year for 
its successes and unique contributions to the local community.
  Small businesses are the backbone of the American economy. The MSU 
VBOC is committed to excellence while supporting many local Veterans as 
they invest in their communities.
  This award is a testament to the hard work by the outstanding team on 
the front lines at the VBOC.
  I am thankful to have the opportunity to congratulate the Mississippi 
State University Veterans Business Outreach Center on the occasion of 
this award, and I look forward to continuing to work in Congress on 
behalf of our Veterans.
today, we honor the lives of the 
six construction workers who passed away as a result of the collapse of 
the Francis Scott Key Bridge in Baltimore.
  Alejandro Hernandez Fuentes, Dorian Ronial Castillo Cabrera, Maynor 
Yassir Suazo Sandoval, Miguel Luna, Jose Mynor Lopez, and Carlos 
Hernandez.
  These men who lost their lives while working on the Bridge were 
everyday heroes.
  These men couldve been our fathers, brothers, grandsons, or nephews.
  That evening, they arrived at work proudly as immigrants, ready to 
help build this country with their own two hands by undertaking 
hazardous and challenging tasks that others refused.
  Their dedication reminds us that immigrants should be celebrated and 
acknowledged for contributing to this country--not vilified and 
attacked for where they come from, the color of their skin, or their 
accent.
  They deserve to be praised and remembered. We should be inspired by 
their tenacity and dedication to pursuing the American Dream for 
themselves and their loved ones.
  We will continue to work on behalf of our immigrant community in 
honor of these brave souls. We will rebuild the Bridge and help build 
an immigration infrastructure that celebrates our workers.
today I pay tribute to a trailblazing 
member of the Michigan State University community: Dr. Gloria Smith. 
Her lifelong dedication to education, advocacy, and service has left an 
indelible mark on the university and beyond.
  After earning her doctorate from the University of Massachusetts in 
1971, Dr. Smiths journey brought her to Michigan State University 
where she joined the faculty of the Department of Education. Throughout 
her tenure at MSU, Dr. Smith distinguished herself as a trailblazer and 
champion of equity, especially for women of color.
  Her footprint at MSU is immeasurable. In 1972, she played a pivotal 
role as a member of the steering committee for the Black Women 
Employees Association of MSU, where she passionately advocated for the 
hiring of more Black women professors. Her achievements, including 
becoming the first Black woman to attain full professorship at MSU and 
being recognized on the universitys Distinguished Wall of Professors, 
serve as a testament to her contributions and enduring influence.
  She lent her leadership and expertise as she served as the Director 
of African American and African Studies, as a member on the MSU 
Athletic Board, and on the universitys presidential search committee. 
In 2007, Dr. Smith retired from MSU as professor emeritus in the 
Department of Counseling, Educational Psychology, and Special 
Education.
. She was 
the first Black President of the Michigan Counseling Psychology and 
Supervision Professional Organization. She has also been a proud member 
of Alpha Kappa Alpha, the first intercollegiate historically African 
American sorority, since 1958. She served as the organizations 18th 
Great Lakes Regional Director and has truly embodied her sisterhoods 
mission to cultivate and encourage high scholastic and ethical 
standards and to be of service to all mankind.
  Dr. Smith continues to show her commitment to education and serving 
others as a member of her local chapter of the Links, Incorporated, an 
organization dedicated to promoting quality education, civic 
responsibility, and enhancing the quality of life of their communities. 
She is also a cherished member of her church, The Friendship Baptist 
Church, where she lives their cote value of serving without restraint.
  With profound gratitude for her extraordinary contributions to 
Michigan State University and her lifelong mission to uplift her 
community, it is my honor to recognize her service here, in the 
Peoples House.
I use today to commemorate the 
5th Annual Power &amp; Influence Luncheon hosted by Global Innovative 
Foundation, Inc. and to pay tribute to their many contributions to our 
community.
  Whereas, the Global Innovative Foundation, Inc is a non-profit 
organization that was incorporated in 2019 by a diverse group of 
professionals engaged to create global awareness for the prevention of 
crimes and to empower the lives of victims and survivors through 
support, education, service, and scholarships; and
  Whereas, I extend my heartfelt congratulations to the esteemed 
honorees of the 5th Annual Power &amp; Influence Luncheon hosted by the 
Global Innovative Foundation, Inc. These individuals have demonstrated 
exceptional leadership, compassion, and dedication in their efforts to 
uplift and support victims and survivors within our community. Among 
them, we commend Miami-Dade County Mayor Daniella Levine Cava for 
recipient of the Power &amp; Influencer Award, State Representative Marie 
Woodson, District 105, for being recognized with the Trailblazer Award, 
Miami-Dade County State Attorney Katherine Fernandez Rundle as the 
recipient of the Justice Advocate Excellence Award, and Florida 
Attorney General Ashley Moody as the recipient of the Imans Light 
Foundation Award. We also honor the commitment and service of Miami-
Dade County Corrections and Rehabilitation Dept. Director Sherea Green, 
Hispanic Women of Distinction President &amp; CEO Elaine Miceli Vasquez, 
Miami Dade College School of Health Sciences Dean Dr. Alwyn Leiba, 
South Region Florida Nurses Association Director Dr. Guillermo Valdes, 
Jewish University System President Lucy Alfonso, Quest2Freedom Founder 
&amp; CEO Victor Williams, Empower U Community Health Center, Guiding Light 
Outreach Founder/CEO Dr. Shanika Ampah, Miami-Dade Countys Office 
Community Advocacy Communications &amp; Media Director Griselle Marino, 
Foundation of the Americas &amp; Global Philanthropy Society CEO/Founder 
Rachel Pinedo, President and CEO of CMS International Group Jeff 
Lozama, and President of Florida Association of Nonprofit 
Organizations, Inc. Marina Pavlov. Lastly, we recognize the dedicated 
service of Global Innovative Foundations 2021-2023 Chairwoman 
Bernadette Pierre, recipient of the Service Excellence Award.

  Whereas, the Global Innovative Foundation, Inc. renders services that 
empower and instills confidence among individuals. Its partnerships 
with various organizations and support of other philanthropic causes 
promote awareness, activities and positive outcomes for victims and 
survivors of crime; and
  Whereas, the Global Innovative Foundation, Inc. provides local, 
national, and international services such as scholarships, coaching, 
mental health services, self-defense classes, youth-focused programs, 
workshops/seminars, advocacy, career development, and mentoring; and
  Now, therefore, be it resolved that I, Frederica S. Wilson, a member 
of the United States House of Representatives, representing the 24th 
Congressional District of Florida, am proud to recognize the Global 
Innovative Foundation, Inc. for their dedication and outstanding 
commitment to motivate and empower the lives of victims and survivors.
I rise today to honor Kimberley 
F. Emmanuel, an outstanding educator as she retires from Miami-Dade 
County Public Schools after 3 decades of service.
a Bachelor of Science Degree in Business 
Administration from the University of Miami and earned a Master of 
Educational Leadership from Nova Southeastern University. She also 
received a certificate from the Principal Institute at Harvard 
University.
  Kimberley Emmanuel is currently the Principal of Phyllis Ruth Miller 
Elementary in Miami, Florida, and she has served Miami-Dade County 
Public Schools in several capacities for the past 35 years and has led 
with strength and compassion. She has created a learning environment of 
high expectations and excellence which has guided her schools to raise 
their levels with state testing. As an administrator, Mrs. Emmanuel 
emphasized student achievement by analyzing data, and using it to drive 
instruction, empower teachers, provide outstanding professional 
development, and forming an effective leadership team to close the 
achievement gap.
, 
including the 2011 Healthy Schools Program National Recognition Bronze 
Award and 2004 Finalist as a School Administrator of the Year for the 
Florida African American Education Alliance. She is the 2008-2009 
District Finalist for Principal of the Year; 2008 Urban League of 
Greater Miami Principal of the Year. She is the recipient of the 2004 
Distinguished Leadership Award, and a 2005 Letter of Commendation by 
Governor Jeb Bush as a School Recognized for Outstanding Progress--Most 
improvement in the State of Florida.
  Under the leadership of Mrs. Emmanuel, Phyllis Ruth Miller Elementary 
is the recipient of the 2023 Merit School of Distinction. This 
distinction is the second highest honor Magnet Schools of America 
bestows and is awarded to those that demonstrate an exemplary 
commitment to academic standards, curriculum innovation, desegregation/
diversity efforts, specialized teaching staffs and parent and community 
involvement.
, please join me in honoring Mrs. Kimberley Emmanuel for 
all she has achieved.
I rise to thank Ms. Sharon Stone for 35 
years of dedicated service to our Nation,
, known as ``Sherry by friends and family, has made 
outstanding contributions to our country for more than three decades as 
part of the U.S. Department of Defense (DoD).
1989 with Army Medicine in 
Europe where she served for 10 years and played a pivotal role in 
implementing centralized medical business operations across Army 
Europe, aligning personnel, workload, and financial systems. In 1999, 
she was named the Army Medical Expense and Reporting Program Manager. 
As Program Manager, she provided crucial medical cost accounting 
education and training to Army military treatment facilities, 
significantly impacting the Medical Expense and Performance Reporting 
System.
  In 2004, Ms. Stone spearheaded the development of the U.S. Army 
Medical Command (MEDCOM) Performance Planning Program, translating 
strategy into action and facilitating the budget allocation of $6.3 
billion for healthcare delivery. In February 2018, Ms. Stone received 
recognition from the Chief of Staff of the U.S. Army for her 
contributions to MEDCOM and the Army.
  Finally, in December 2018, Ms. Stone was requested to lead, develop, 
and implement the Defense Health Agencys Quadruple Aim Performance 
Planning process. Since then, Ms. Stone created a single, integrated, 
transparent process to align military treatment facilities with the 
Defense Health Agencys priorities. Ms Stone received the DoD Spirit of 
Service Award for her display of honor, integrity, and excellence 
through outstanding support as a public servant to the U.S. Department 
of Defense in recognition of her work.
  Throughout her career, Ms. Stone has trained over 30,000 personnel 
across the Military Health System. Her commitment to service and her 
passion for sharing her knowledge and skills have proven to be valuable 
assets to her team. Her contributions have had a profound and positive 
impact on the Military Health System.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in celebrating and 
thanking Ms. Sharon Stone for 35 years of service to our country, and 
in wishing her the best in her retirement.
I rise today to recognize the career of an 
outstanding New Yorker and educator, President of Genesee Community 
College, Dr. James M. Sunser.
  Dr. Sunser has spent over a decade as President of Genesee Community 
College and has been an invaluable leader and partner in education, 
fostering collaboration and strengthening the ties between Genesee 
Community College and the citizens of Genesee County, New York. Under 
. Call Arena and the Student Success Center, capital projects that 
represented the largest fundraising efforts ever undertaken by the 
College.
  Dr. Sunser has demonstrated an unwavering commitment to the success 
and well-being of students, faculty, and staff at Genesee Community 
College, making significant strides in advancing educational 
opportunities for all. The 24th Congressional District of New York 
extends its heartfelt appreciation for Dr. Sunsers role in enhancing 
the educational experience and contributing to the overall prosperity 
of the region.
  I am pleased to extend my best wishes to Dr. Sunser for a fulfilling 
and well-deserved retirement, filled with joy, accomplishments, and 
continued success in all his future endeavors.
today, on the anniversary of the week of the 
start of the Civil War, I introduce the Civil War Defenses of 
Washington National Historical Park Act, which would recognize and 
preserve the Civil War Defenses of Washington located in the District 
of Columbia, Virginia and Maryland. The Defenses of Washington, 
including forts, unarmed batteries and rifle trenches, created a ring 
of protection for the nations capital during the Civil War. This bill 
would redesignate the 22 Civil War Defenses of Washington currently 
under National Park Service jurisdiction as a national historical park, 
and allow other sites associated with the Defenses of Washington that 
are owned by D.C. or a unit of state governments to be affiliated with 
the national historical park through cooperative agreements. This bill 
would also require the Secretary of the Interior to facilitate the 
history of the Civil War, including the history of the Defenses of 
Washington and the Shenandoah Valley Campaign of 1864, being assembled, 
arrayed and conveyed for the benefit of the public for the knowledge, 
education and inspiration of this and future generations. In 2018, the 
House Natural Resources Committee Subcommittee on Federal Lands held a 
hearing on this bill. Although the Department of the Interior opposed 
this bill, I feel strongly that the Defenses of Washington need 
additional recognition and should be redesignated as a national 
historical park.

  The Defenses of Washington were constructed at the beginning of the 
war, in 1861, as a ring of protection for the nations capital and for 
President Abraham Lincoln. By the end of the war, these defenses 
included 68 forts, 93 unarmed batteries, 807 mounted cannons, 13 miles 
of rifle trenches and 32 miles of military roads. The major test of the 
Defenses of Washington came with the Shenandoah Valley Campaign of 
1864, when Confederate Lieutenant General Jubal Early, directed by 
General Robert E. Lee, sought to attack the nations capital from the 
north, causing Union forces threatening to attack Richmond, the capital 
of the Confederacy, to be withdrawn. General Early was delayed by Union 
Major General Lew Wallace at the Battle of Monocacy on July 9, 1864, 
and was stopped at the northern edge of Washington at the Battle of 
Fort Stevens on July 11-12, 1864. The Shenandoah Valley Campaign ended 
when Union Lieutenant General Philip Sheridan defeated General Early at 
the Battle of Cedar Creek, Virginia on October 19, 1864.
  Nearly all the individual forts in the Defenses of Washington--on 
both sides of the Potomac and Anacostia rivers--were involved in 
stopping General Earlys attack, and the Battle of Fort Stevens was the 
second and last attempt by the Confederate Army to attack Washington.
  Taken together, these battles were pivotal to the outcome of the war 
and the freedom and democracy that the war represented for this 
country. It is therefore fitting that we recognize the Defenses of 
Washington by redesignating them as a national historical park.
  I urge my colleagues to support this bill.
I rise to honor the life of a very special 
man, Mr. Jack Kain, of Versailles, Kentucky. Mr. Kain was born on June 
18, 1929, and he passed away on March 26, 2024, at the age of 94.
a central Kentucky farm by loving parents. In 
1947, while he was a college student at the University of Kentucky, he 
started selling cars. Mr. Kain earned a Bachelor of Business degree 
from the University of Kentucky. He enjoyed cheering on teams led by 
coaching legends Adolph Rupp and Bear Bryant, becoming a lifelong UK 
fan. He served our country in the United States Air Force as a Second 
Lieutenant during the Korean War. In 1953, he opened his first 
automobile dealership. He continued in the automotive industry, where 
he built a successful lifelong career. For many years, he and his 
family have operated Jack Kain Ford, where they have served over 70,000 
customers since the 1980s. Mr. Kain was a leader in the automobile 
industry. He led the National Automobile Dealers Association in 2005 as 
Chairman. He represented Kentuckys franchised new-car dealers on 
NADAs board of directors for many years.
a leader in his community and was recognized as Woodford 
County Chamber of Commerces Businessman of the Year in 1992. A 
generous man, he supported education, medical care and research, and 
many other charitable efforts to make the community and the nation a 
better place.
  More importantly than his business and community successes, Mr Kain 
kept his family at the forefront of his life. He had nine children, 
twenty-two grandchildren, and eighteen great-grandchildren. He is 
survived by his wife Alice Stewart Kain and children Vickie Fister, 
Patrick Kain, David Kain, Steve Kain, Bob Kain, and Bill Kain. He was 
preceded in death by his daughters Becky Grimes and Suzanne Hockensmith 
and his son Jack Kain, Jr.
  Jack Kain was a great man who loved his family, his community, his 
country, and his God. He was respected by his community and his 
colleagues in the automobile industry throughout America. It is my 
honor to call him my friend and to recognize his life before the United 
States House of Representatives.
I rise today to recognize the Chiricahua 
National Monument on the centennial anniversary of its designation as a 
national monument.
  Recently, I visited the Chiricahua National Monument and explored 
parts of the 12,000 acres of hiking trails, campgrounds, and scenic 
views.
  Chiricahua National Monument is one of the most treasured landmarks 
in Arizona. This ``Wonderland of Rocks features unique, boulder-
balancing rock pillars formed by volcanic eruptions. These abstract 
formations draw visitors from across the nation and around the world to 
the Southeast corner of our state.
  It is a privilege to have this incredible landscape in our own 
backyard. Not only does it provide great recreational opportunity and 
natural habitat, it is also a major driver for southern Arizonas 
economy.
  The monument annually supports over 40 jobs and produces $4.4 million 
of economic output, with 60,000 visitors that come each year generating 
$4.1 million in spending.
  Last year, I proudly introduced a bipartisan bill, the Chiricahua 
National Park Act (H.R. 1479), aiming to update the national monument 
to the status of a national park.
RECOGNIZING CHRISTOPHER SANTANGELOS 27 YEARS OF FEDERAL LAW 
                              of new york
I include in the Record the following 
Proclamation recognizing Christopher Santangelo, President of the New 
York City Chapter of the Federal Law Enforcement Officers Association 
on his retirement after 27 years of federal law enforcement service on 
April 27, 2024.

       Whereas Mr. Santangelo, who grew up in Bay Ridge, Brooklyn 
     from childhood until his early 30s, is a product of a New 
     York City Education. He graduated from Kingsborough Community 
     College with an AAS degree in accounting, earned a BS in 
     accounting from Brooklyn College, and obtained an MS from 
     John Jay College.
       Whereas Christopher Santangelo began his federal law 
     enforcement career in January 1997 with the United States 
     Park Police in Washington, D.C. where he was stationed to 
     protect the White House in our nations capital.
       Whereas from mid-1998 to early 2000, Mr. Santangelo was 
     assigned to the New York Field Division, where he led the JBU 
     unit to numerous arrests, earning him the Officer of the 
     Month award five times. Additionally, Mr. Santangelo was 
     assigned to one or more NYPD narcotics task forces and served 
     as a plainclothes officer with the U.S. Park Police in 
     Operation Weed and Seed, covering areas in Brooklyn, Queens, 
     and Staten Island.
       Whereas in April 2000, Mr. Santangelo became a special 
     agent for the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms and 
     was assigned to the New York Field Division, Group V--HIDTA. 
As a 
     result of his unwavering dedication, Mr. Santangelo was 
     awarded a commendation for meritorious service for his 
     actions during the September 11, 2001, World Trade Center 
     attacks and the subsequent evidence recovery.
       Whereas after transferring to the U.S. Department of 
     Agriculture in June 2002, Mr. Santangelo conducted 
     investigations into fraud, waste, abuse, and mismanagement 
     related to USDA programs and operations. Mr. Santangelo 
     conducted or participated in hundreds of program crime 
     investigations, including inquiries into the Food and 
     Nutrition Services (FNS) EBT program, violations of the 
     Animal Welfare Act, violations of the Sherman Act, farm loan 
     fraud, prohibited agricultural product smuggling, and 
     agroterrorism. He also served as the anti-money laundering 
     subject matter expert (SME) for the Northeast Region.
       Whereas for his investigative excellence, Mr. Santangelo is 
     a past award recipient of the Council of Inspectors General 
     (CIGIE) Investigative Excellence Award for leading a multi-
     million-dollar civil investigation into the Supplemental 
     Nutrition Assistance Program Error Rate. Additionally, Mr. 
     Santangelo received recognition from the NYPD Detective 
     Endowment Association for his participation and assistance 
     while being assigned part-time to the NYPD Counter Terrorism 
     Bureau in Brooklyn, New York, from 2002 to 2005.
       Whereas in February 2017, Mr. Santangelo transferred to the 
     Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Office of Inspector 
     General, New York Field Division, where he investigated 
     failed banks and former members of the board of directors of 
     failed banks. Mr. Santangelo successfully investigated global 
     financial institutions for market manipulation in Foreign 
     Currency (FX) trading, as well as in the High Yield Junk and 
     Variable Rate bond markets. Additionally, Mr. Santangelo was 
     the co-case agent in United States v. Rishi Shah, Shradha 
     Agarwal, Brad Purdy, et al., in which the former executives 
     were convicted in a $1 billion corporate fraud case, 
     resulting in him receiving the Attorney General Award in 
     January 2024.
       Whereas in June 2022, Mr. Santangelo was promoted to the 
     SSA position within the FDIC-OIG, New York Regional Office, 
     which covers New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, and all of 
     New England while also serving as the lead SSA for 
     investigations in the Eastern District of New York 
     (encompassing Brooklyn, Queens, Staten Island, Nassau, and 
     Suffolk Counties), leading or coordinating investigations 
     into bank insiders, borrowers, and accountants suspected of 
     committing bank, wire and elder fraud. Furthermore, Mr. 
     Santangelo personally directed disaster relief and romance 
     scam investigations in the Smithtown--Hauppauge--Kings Park 
     area related to Hurricane Sandy, as well as investigations 
     related to the CARES Act.
       Whereas since 2009 Mr. Santangelo has served as the 
     President of the New York Chapter of the Federal Law 
     Enforcement Officers Association, Vice President of the 
     Federal Law Enforcement Foundation, and is a member of the 
     Fraternal Order of Police Lodge No. 53.
       Whereas our Nation is forever indebted to Christopher 
     Santangelo and offers its sincerest gratitude and warmest 
     wishes in his retirement.
I rise today to recognize Katelyn 
OConnell of Arvada, Colorado. Katelyn was selected as one of 250 high 
school students across the country to participate in the Department of 
States prestigious Congress-Bundestag Youth Exchange (CBYX) Program.
  Launched in 1983, CBYX selects high achieving youth from both Germany 
and the United States to live in each others country for one academic 
year. During their year abroad, students will foster meaningful 
relationships between America and Germany, while giving participants 
new perspectives on peoples and cultures beyond their own. Many CBYX 
alumni go on to distinguished careers in foreign affairs and public 
service using the language skills gained through this scholarship 
program.
  This year, Katelyn will travel to Germany, attending school, living 
with a host family, and collaborating with the Department of State to 
integrate into her host community and promote mutual understanding 
between Americans and the German people.
  On behalf of the people of Colorados Seventh Congressional District, 
it is my honor to congratulate Katelyn OConnell for this impressive 
accomplishment and wish her all the best in her upcoming year in 
Germany.
I rise today to recognize Pauline 
Biedka, a remarkable constituent from my district, and to pay tribute 
to her on the celebration of her 100th Birthday on April 13, 2024.
  The daughter of Philomena and Luke Della Vella, Pauline was born on 
April 13, 1924 in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania--one of nine children 
Pauline married her husband Peter, a World War II Veteran in 1942. They 
moved to Bristol, Bucks County and built their forever home. They had a 
daughter and two sons.
  Pauline was a ``Rosie the Riveter during World War II and the 
Korean War. During that time, she worked at Fleetwings and Kaiser Metal 
in Bristol, Pennsylvania. In addition, Pauline was a Neshaminy School 
District crossing guard for twenty-five years.
  Pauline was and still is a devoted wife, remains an amazing mother, 
grandmother of six, and great-grandmother of twelve.
, I ask my esteemed colleagues in the U.S. House of 
Representatives to please join me in extending our heartfelt 
congratulations, sincere well-wishes, and all of Gods Blessings to 
Pauline Biedka on the celebration of her 100th Birthday.