I rise today to celebrate the life of Mrs. 
Barbara Leonard Hayes of Carrollton, Texas, who peacefully passed away 
on April 6, 2025.
  Barbara was born on July 8, 1937, in Tom, Oklahoma and was adopted by 
John and Lena Noll Leonard. She attended Durant High School and 
graduated from the University of Oklahoma in 1958, where she earned her 
bachelors degree in education. Barbara began her career as a Flight 
Attendant for American Airlines out of Chicago, where she was 
recognized in the World Book Encyclopedia for her unique, vintage title 
of ``Airline Stewardess. Soon after, she moved to Sherman to begin 
teaching elementary education at Sherman ISD. On June 11, 1960, Barbara 
married the love of her life, Stanley Joe Hayes, in Durant, Oklahoma. 
Together, they raised two children and have many more grandchildren.
  In addition to her critical work as an educator, Barbara was involved 
in many community initiatives throughout North Texas. She served as the 
PTA President at Wakefield Elementary, Cub Scout leader and Den Mother, 
and a member of many civic and philanthropic organizations. Barbara was 
also very passionate about rescuing animals, traveling, and most 
importantly, trusting God. She was a devoted woman of faith and a 
member of the First Presbyterian Church in Sherman, now the Covenant 
Presbyterian Church. The kindness, joy, and warmth that Barbara brought 
with her presence will always be remembered by her loved ones.
  I have requested the United States flag to be flown over our Nations 
Capitol in recognition of Barbaras life and contributions to North 
Texas. She will be dearly missed by her friends, family, and all who 
knew her.
and still I rise. I include in the 
Record the following Proclamation recognizing Dr. Dana Carson for 40 
years of service:
       Whereas, Apostle Dr. Dana Carson hails from Chicago, 
     Illinois, and is the Founder &amp; Senior Pastor of the 
     Reflections of Christs Kingdom World Outreach International 
     (R.O.C.K.) church in Houston, Texas, serving ministry for 40 
     years full-time through Executive and Pastoral leadership 
     roles; and
       Whereas, Apostle Dr. Dana Carson is a testament to 
     resilience, perseverance, and dedication, overcoming 
     adversity as a high school dropout by pursuing higher 
     education and earning three doctoral degrees from Regent 
     University, Logos University, and Boston University Graduate 
     School of Theology, along with four masters degrees, as well 
     as several executive certifications. He is the founder and 
     chancellor of the Kingdom Bible University and Kingdom 
     Theological Seminary; and
       Whereas, Apostle Dr. Dana Carson is a globally renowned 
     speaker, scholar, author, and musical artist featured on 
     broadcast television networks, releasing more than 260 books, 
     devotional guides, as well as curricula; and through his 
     music, delivering a powerful message of hope and resilience; 
     and
       Whereas, Apostle Dr. Dana Carson was recognized by 
     President Barak Obama and was bestowed the Lifetime 
     Achievement Call to Service Award, was honored as one of the 
     Top 50 influential Leaders Worldwide in Pentecostalism and he 
     is an active member of Kappa Alpha Psi Fraternity, Inc.
       Now, therefore, be it resolved that, on behalf of the 
     constituents of the Ninth Congressional District of Texas, I 
     am proud to salute Apostle Dr. Dana Carson for his 40 years 
     of dedicated service to enriching the lives of his family, 
     congregation, our Nation, and the globe. Best wishes on this 
     momentous occasion.
I rise today in honor of the 75th 
anniversary of the VA Medical Center in Manchester, New Hampshire and 
in celebration of 75 years of unwavering commitment to veteran health 
care.
  At the end of World War I, citizens of New Hampshire began advocating 
for a local veterans hospital in order to properly honor Granite 
Staters who bravely served their country. After an extensive and hard-
fought campaign that made it all the way to Congress, the hospital was 
granted approval and opened its doors on July 2, 1950.
  For 75 years, the Manchester VA has provided compassionate care to 
countless veterans and their families. From physical therapy to mental 
health care, the Manchester VAs comprehensive services help many 
veterans to live happy and healthy lives. The dedicated VA staff create 
a supportive and encouraging environment where veterans feel empowered 
to seek the medical help they need.
  Guided by the needs of veterans and their families, the Manchester VA 
remains committed to holistic treatment. The Manchester VAs research 
program is internationally recognized for the study and treatment of 
post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and other serious mental health 
challenges. A renowned teaching hospital, the Manchester VA actively

trains the next generation of caregivers to ensure that their important 
work continues for years to come.
  On behalf of my constituents in New Hampshires First Congressional 
District, I want to congratulate the Manchester VA on 75 years of 
devoted service to veterans and their families. We are grateful for 
your commitment to our communitys veterans and I look forward to 
continuing to support this vital work.
I rise today to recognize and 
celebrate an extraordinary achievement by a remarkable young man from 
my district, Ahmari Taylor, a vital member of the Walter H. Dyett High 
School for the Arts boys basketball team, the Eagles. This team 
achieved a historic victory, winning the 2024-2025 Illinois High School 
Association (IHSA) Class 2A State Championship with a decisive 52-41 
win over Althoff Catholic High School on March 15, 2025.
  This championship is more than just a win on the court; it is a 
profound testament to the resilience, determination, and unity of the 
Dyett High School community and the vibrant Bronzeville neighborhood. A 
decade ago, Dyett faced the threat of closure, but through powerful 
community advocacy and unwavering commitment, its doors remained open. 
Today, the Eagles triumph, in which Ahmari Taylor played a crucial 
role, symbolizes the incredible potential that flourishes when a 
community invests in its youth and its institutions.
  Ahmari Taylor, along with his teammates, demonstrated exceptional 
skill, discipline, and teamwork throughout their season, navigating 
challenges and competing at the highest level. His hard work and 
dedication were integral to the teams success, culminating in this 
well-deserved championship that brings immense pride and joy to his 
school, family, and the entire community.
  I also extend my deepest gratitude to Head Coach Jamaal Gill, whose 
visionary leadership and guidance steered the team to this historic 
victory, and to Assistant Coaches Kimani Harris, Pierre Adams, and 
Nathan Townsen, Jr., whose mentorship was vital to the players 
development.
, Ahmari Taylors contribution to the Dyett Eagles 
journey from near closure to state champions is an inspiring narrative 
for us all. It underscores the critical importance of supporting our 
public schools and investing in programs that empower young people to 
achieve their fullest potential. I ask my colleagues to join me in 
congratulating Ahmari Taylor and the entire Dyett High School boys 
basketball team on their momentous achievement and honoring them for 
the inspiration they provide to communities across our Nation.
I rise today to recognize and 
celebrate an extraordinary achievement by a remarkable individual from 
my district, Darrell Bullock, a dedicated Assistant Coach for the 
Walter H. Dyett High School for the Arts boys basketball team, the 
Eagles. This team achieved a historic victory, winning the 2024-2025 
Illinois High School Association (IHSA) Class 2A State Championship 
with a decisive 52-41 win over Althoff Catholic High School on March 
15, 2025.
  This championship is more than just a win on the court; it is a 
profound testament to the resilience, determination, and unity of the 
Dyett High School community and the vibrant Bronzeville neighborhood. A 
decade ago, Dyett faced the threat of closure, but through powerful 
community advocacy and unwavering commitment, its doors remained open. 
Today, the Eagles triumph, shaped significantly by the guidance and 
mentorship of coaches like Darrell Bullock, symbolizes the incredible 
potential that flourishes when a community invests in its youth and its 
institutions.
  Assistant Coach Darrell Bullock, alongside Head Coach Jamaal Gill, 
II, provided invaluable leadership, strategic insight, and unwavering 
support throughout the season. His dedication to developing these young 
athletes,

both on and off the court, was instrumental in fostering the skill, 
discipline, and teamwork that led to this historic victory. His hard 
work and commitment were integral to the teams success, culminating in 
this well-deserved championship that brings immense pride and joy to 
the school, the players, their families, and the entire community.
, Darrell Bullocks contribution to the Dyett Eagles 
journey from near closure to state champions is an inspiring narrative 
for us all. It underscores the critical importance of dedicated 
educators and mentors in supporting our public schools and empowering 
young people to achieve their fullest potential. I ask my colleagues to 
join me in congratulating Assistant Coach Darrell Bullock and the 
entire Dyett High School boys basketball team on their momentous 
achievement and honoring them for the inspiration they provide to 
communities across our Nation.
I rise to recognize North Carolina native 
and NASCAR legend, Greg Biffle, for his courageous and selfless 
contributions to the Hurricane Helene recovery effort.
  In the wake of the chaos and destruction brought about by Hurricane 
Helene, Mr. Biffle utilized his personal helicopter and piloting skills 
to assist in emergency rescue efforts. Without hesitation, Mr. Biffle 
put himself in harms way by flying into dangerous and unpredictable 
areas of North Carolina to evacuate stranded individuals, deliver 
supplies, and support first responders. Mr. Biffles decisive actions 
directly contributed to relief efforts and brought aid to those in 
need.
  It is my honor to take this opportunity to recognize Mr. Greg Biffle 
for risking his personal safety to help those in need. In a time of 
great divide, Mr. Biffles actions are a reminder of the unwavering 
American spirit that exists throughout the great state of North 
Carolina, and the country.
, please join me in honoring Mr. Greg Biffle for his 
selfless actions in the wake of Hurricane Helene.
I rise today to recognize and 
celebrate an extraordinary achievement by a remarkable individual from 
my district, Jamal Gill, II, a dedicated Assistant Coach for the Walter 
H. Dyett High School for the Arts boys basketball team, the Eagles. 
This team achieved a historic victory, winning the 2024-2025 Illinois 
High School Association (IHSA) Class 2A State Championship with a 
decisive 52-41 win over Althoff Catholic High School on March 15, 2025.
  This championship is more than just a win on the court; it is a 
profound testament to the resilience, determination, and unity of the 
Dyett High School community and the vibrant Bronzeville neighborhood. A 
decade ago, Dyett faced the threat of closure, but through powerful 
community advocacy and unwavering commitment, its doors remained open. 
Today, the Eagles triumph, shaped significantly by the guidance and 
mentorship of coaches like Jamal Gill, II, symbolizes the incredible 
potential that flourishes when a community invests in its youth and its 
institutions.
  Assistant Coach Jamal Gill, II, alongside Head Coach Jamaal Gill, 
provided invaluable leadership, strategic insight, and unwavering 
support throughout the season. His dedication to developing these young 
athletes, both on and off the court, was instrumental in fostering the 
skill, discipline, and teamwork that led to this historic victory. His 
hard work and commitment were integral to the teams success, 
culminating in this well-deserved championship that brings immense 
pride and joy to the school, the players, their families, and the 
entire community.
, Jamal Gill, IIs contribution to the Dyett journey from 
near closure to state champions is an inspiring narrative for us all. 
It underscores the critical importance of dedicated educators and 
mentors in supporting our public schools and empowering young people to 
achieve their fullest potential. I ask my colleagues to join me in 
congratulating Assistant Coach Jamal Gill, II and the entire Dyett High 
School boys basketball team on their momentous achievement and 
honoring them for the inspiration they provide to communities across 
our Nation.
I rise today to recognize and 
celebrate an extraordinary achievement by a remarkable individual from 
my district, Nathan Townsen, a dedicated Assistant Coach for the Walter 
H. Dyett High School for the Arts boys basketball team, the Eagles. 
This team achieved a historic victory, winning the 2024-2025 Illinois 
High School Association (IHSA) Class 2A State Championship with a 
decisive 52-41 win over Althoff Catholic High School on March 15, 2025.
  This championship is more than just a win on the court; it is a 
profound testament to the resilience, determination, and unity of the 
Dyett High School community and the vibrant A decade ago, Dyett faced 
the threat of closure, but through powerful community advocacy and 
unwavering commitment, its doors remained open. Today, the Eagles 
triumph, shaped significantly by the guidance and mentorship of coaches 
like Nathan Townsen, symbolizes the incredible potential that 
flourishes when a community invests in its youth and its institutions.
  Assistant Coach Nathan Townsen, alongside Head Coach Jamaal Gill, 
provided invaluable leadership, strategic insight, and unwavering 
support throughout the season. His dedication to developing these young 
athletes, both on and off the court, was instrumental in fostering the 
skill, discipline, and teamwork that led to this historic victory. His 
hard work and commitment were integral to the teams success, 
culminating in this well-deserved championship that brings immense 
pride and joy to the school, the players, their families, and the 
entire community.
, Nathan Townsens contribution to the Dyett Eagles 
journey from near closure to state champions is an inspiring narrative 
for us all. It underscores the critical importance of dedicated 
educators and mentors in supporting our public schools and empowering 
young people to achieve their fullest potential. I ask my colleagues to 
join me in congratulating Assistant Coach Nathan Townsen and the entire 
Dyett High School boys basketball team on their momentous achievement 
and honoring them for the inspiration they provide to communities 
across our Nation.
I rise today to recognize and 
celebrate an extraordinary achievement by a remarkable individual from 
my district, Ron Thomas, a dedicated Assistant Coach for the Walter H. 
Dyett High School for the Arts boys basketball team, the Eagles. This 
team achieved a historic victory, winning the 2024-2025 Illinois High 
School Association (IHSA) Class 2A State Championship with a decisive 
52-41 win over Althoff Catholic High School on March 15, 2025.
  This championship is more than just a win on the court; it is a 
profound testament to the resilience, determination, and unity of the 
Dyett High School community and the vibrant Bronzeville neighborhood. A 
decade ago, Dyett faced the threat of closure, but through powerful 
community advocacy and unwavering commitment, its doors remained open. 
Today, the Eagles triumph, shaped significantly by the guidance and 
mentorship of coaches like Ron Thomas, symbolizes the incredible 
potential that flourishes when a community invests in its youth and its 
institutions.
  Assistant Coach Ron Thomas, alongside Head Coach Jamaal Gill, 
provided invaluable

leadership, strategic insight, and unwavering support throughout the 
season. His dedication to developing these young athletes, both on and 
off the court, was instrumental in fostering the skill, discipline, and 
teamwork that led to this historic victory. His hard work and 
commitment were integral to the teams success, culminating in this 
well-deserved championship that brings immense pride and joy to the 
school, the players, their families, and the entire community.
, Ron Thomas contribution to the Dyett Eagles journey 
from near closure to state champions is an inspiring narrative for us 
all. It underscores the critical importance of dedicated educators and 
mentors in supporting our public schools and empowering young people to 
achieve their fullest potential. I ask my colleagues to join me in 
congratulating Assistant Coach Ron Thomas and the entire Dyett High 
School boys basketball team on their momentous achievement and 
honoring them for the inspiration they provide to communities across 
our Nation.
I rise to honor Sorayda Santos as 
Californias 52nd Congressional District Constituent of the Month for 
January 2025.
  Sorayda is the co-chair of the nationally recognized Hermanitas 
Program at MANA de San Diego, which empowers Latina middle and high 
school students to reach their highest potential. This program pairs 
each student with a dedicated mentor to help guide them, inspire them, 
and provide them with the support they need to succeed.
  During her three years as co-chair of the Hermanitas Program, Sorayda 
has increased the cohort size, improved seminar offerings, and built 
lasting partnerships with community organizations. Sorayda has also led 
efforts to bring a new project management seminar to the program, 
giving students a valuable, hands-on learning experience that will 
benefit them for years to come.
  In addition to leading the Hermanitas Program, Sorayda currently 
mentors an eighth-grade student, demonstrating an unwavering commitment 
to giving back.
  Sorayda is an exceptional leader and mentor who works hard every day 
to inspire the next generation of Latinas to dream big and achieve 
greatness. I cant think of a better person to have recognized during 
National Mentorship Month.
I rise today to recognize Alex Willis of 
Leadville, Colorado for winning the USA Triathlon Winter National 
Championships in Breckenridge, Colorado.
  Alex is a third-generation ultra-triathlete and a coach who competes 
in snowshoeing, trail running, cycling, Nordic skiing, and more. His 
hard work paid off recently when he broke the tape with a time of 
1:28:31 at the USA Triathlon Winter National Championships earning him 
a spot in the World Championships to be held in Pontevedra, Spain next 
year. We are incredibly proud that hell represent the United States at 
this global event.
  On behalf of the people of Colorados Seventh Congressional District, 
it is my honor to congratulate Alex Willis for his win at the 2025 
Winter Triathlon National Championships, and join his friends and 
family in rooting for his success at the World Championships.
I rise today to recognize Dr. Kiara 
Kuenzler of Denver, Colorado for being named the Nexstar 2025 
Remarkable Woman of Denver.
  During her 7-year tenure as President and CEO, Dr. Kuenzler 
positioned the Jefferson Center for Mental Health as a leading 
community provider by expanding access to services and growing the 
Centers workforce across the region. Dr. Kuenzler recognized the need 
to bring mental health services to people where they were at, so she 
created partnerships with schools, medical practices, law enforcement, 
and others to facilitate more than 150 outposts for substance use 
disorder care. She grew the Centers workforce by over 300 employees 
and improved access to treatment for over 25,000 Coloradans in the 
Front Range to ensure those in rural communities could access care.
  Dr. Kuenzler earned this honor because of her dedication to expanding 
mental health care services and her passion for helping people overcome 
obstacles in their lives. Shell be remembered as an important part of 
the Jefferson Centers legacy.
  On behalf of the people of Colorados Seventh Congressional District, 
it is my honor to congratulate Dr. Kiara Kuenzler for being recognized 
as the ``2025 Remarkable Woman of Denver.
I rise today to recognize John Curtis for 
his promotion to Chief of the South Metro Fire Department.
. In his previous position, John oversaw Emergency 
Medical Services, dispatch, fleet services, and special operations. His 
educational background in organizational leadership, along with his 
extensive on the job experience, has separated him from the other 76 
applicants. Our community is fortunate to have an incoming Chief with 
the years of experience and education that John brings to this role.
  On behalf of the people of Colorados Seventh Congressional District, 
it is my honor to congratulate John Curtis on his promotion to Chief of 
South Metro Fire Rescue. We thank him for his continued commitment to 
our community.
I rise today to honor the Golden Police 
Department of Golden, Colorado, for serving and protecting our 
community.
  We are all grateful to the Department and Chief of Police Joe Harvey, 
as they strive to maintain a culture of positive public engagement, 
equity, and compassion for all. Founded in 1874, the department has a 
long history of dedicated officers working to build public trust 
through accountability and equitable policing.
  National Police Week offers an opportunity to honor law enforcement 
and pay tribute to those who gave their lives serving their 
communities. This week, we honor Officer Evan Dunn, who was a member of 
the Golden Police Department, who tragically passed away in the line of 
duty in November 2024. Officer Dunn joined the Department after serving 
as an Army Aviator and Black Hawk pilot in the Missouri and Colorado 
Army National Guard. As a soldier, an officer, and a devoted husband, 
Officer Dunn was a servant in every aspect of his life. His legacy of 
kindness, dedication, and service to our community and our country will 
not be forgotten.
  On behalf of the people of Colorados Seventh Congressional District, 
it is my honor to thank the Golden Police Department for their devotion 
to public service in the line of duty.