I rise today in celebration of 30 years 
of Brady Background Checks.
  The landmark Brady Bill, championed by Jim and Sarah Brady, was 
enacted 30 years ago on February 28, 1994.
  This historic legislation established our nations background check 
system for guns sold at licensed firearms dealers.
  The Brady Bill is named after Reagan White House Press Secretary Jim 
Brady.
  After Jim Brady survived a bullet to the head during the 1981 
assassination attempt of President Reagan, he and his wife, Sarah 
Brady, knew our country urgently needed common-sense solutions to 
prevent guns from falling into the hands of those who intend to cause 
harm.
  Since its enactment, the Brady Bill has blocked almost 4.9 million 
prohibited gun transactions.
  Thirty years later, the Brady Bill continues to save countless lives 
each day because background checks work.
  As we celebrate enduring milestones that have transformed our 
country, I cannot help but remember the lives that have been selfishly 
lost to inaction and negligence.
  So, in addition to celebrating the success of the Brady Bill, I would 
like to take a moment to urge the passage of an additional, necessary 
piece of gun violence prevention legislation--H.R. 52, The Kimberly 
Vaughan Firearm Safe Storage Act.
  This bill was named after Kimberly Vaughan, a 14-year-old girl, who 
was among the ten lives we lost during the devastating Santa Fe High 
School shooting on May 18, 2018.
  H.R. 52 will establish best practices for firearm storage to protect 
children from improperly stored or misused firearms and establish a 
grant program for local government and nonprofits to distribute safe 
storage devices.
  In particular, the Attorney General is directed to establish 
voluntary best practices relating to safe firearm storage and publish 
them on a website and in print.
  Secondly, it will require most weapons to have a clear written notice 
on the packaging that says, ``Safe Storage Saves Lives and how to 
obtain the best practices established by the Attorney General.
  Additionally, the bill will provide grants to states and local 
governments with a ten-year, $10 million grant program to distribute 
safe storage devices.
  As Ranking Member of the Subcommittee on Crime and Federal Government 
Surveillance, member of the Gun Violence Prevention Task Force, and co-
founding member of the Childrens Caucus, gun violence prevention and 
the protecting of children is deeply important to me.
  And so, in highlighting the importance of passing bills, such as H.R. 
52, we must also reflect and remember the lives of those lost to 
senseless gun violence.
  Kimberly Vaughan loved cats, Harry Potter, and regularly took trips 
to the library.
  She was drawing geometric shapes in her first period art class when 
she was tragically killed by a 17-year-old student who was on a 
shooting rampage.
  That student ultimately massacred 8 students, 2 teachers, and wounded 
13 others at Santa Fe High School in Texas.
  It was the worst school shooting since 17 people were killed at 
Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in Parkland, Florida just two 
months prior.
  The shotgun and the .38 caliber pistol the shooter took to school 
belonged to his father and were available to him at his home.
  Firearm injury is the leading cause of death for children and young 
adults in the United States.
  Although American children are ``twice as likely to be shot and 
killed as they are to die drowning, there are more safety regulations 
for pools than gun storage according to a report by Everytown for Gun 
Safety.
  Every year, almost 20,000 children are shot and killed or wounded by 
a firearm, and 3 million are exposed to gun violence.
  One in three U.S. households with children have firearms and firearms 
accounted for nearly 19 percent of childhood deaths in 2021, a 50 
percent increase since 2019.
  On average, 9 minors are killed by improperly stored or misused guns 
every day.
  In my home state of Texas, more than 4,000 Texans are shot and killed 
each year.
  Safe storage practices are critically important to keep firearms away 
from dangerous individuals and to keep children and families safe from 
senseless gun violence.
  In the last decade, nearly 2 million firearms have been reported 
stolen.
  Between 2010 and 2016, police recovered more than 23,000 stolen 
firearms that were used to commit kidnapping, armed robberies, sexual 
assaults, murders, and other violent crimes.
  An estimated 4.6 million minors live in homes with at least one 
unlocked, loaded firearm; on average, 9 children are killed by 
improperly stored or misused guns every day.
  The passage of the Brady Bill reminds us that bold action to prevent 
gun violence is possible.
  Americans should be safe from gun violence in their homes and 
neighborhoods.
  Americans should not be shot at Super Bowl parades.
  Americans should not be shot in their schools.
  Americans should not be shot at their places of worship.

  It is simply unconscionable that guns are now the leading cause of 
death of children and teens in America.
  Just two years ago, I joined Congress in passing the Bipartisan Safer 
Communities Act, the first major gun violence prevention law since the 
Brady Bill.
  Already, this legislation is saving lives, but we need bolder action. 
It is long past the time to do something about the epidemic of gun 
violence in our nation? The nation that prides itself on protecting our 
children and the future generations. If we want to protect Americans, 
we must start by learning how to effectively store guns in the homes 
that choose to have them.
  Americans want more than thoughts and prayers.
  They want action.
  Gun safety is a nonpartisan issue that requires a bipartisan 
solution.
  Over 90 percent of Americans--including Republicans, Democrats, and 
Independents alike--want to expand the Brady Bill and pass universal 
background checks so that we can end the scourge of gun violence.
  A majority of Americans want an assault weapons ban, extreme risk 
laws, and support for community violence intervention.
  Data for Progress finds 49 percent of voters support changing Senate 
rules so Democrats can pass gun control legislation.
  This includes 76 percent of Democrats, 43 percent of Independents, 
and 24 percent of Republicans.
  Put simply, Americans deserve sensible action to end this epidemic.
  The Bradys legacy lives on today in the gun violence prevention 
organization named after them.
  We must remain persistent in the fight for a safer America that is 
free of gun violence.
  I will continue to work with colleagues to end this epidemic.
I rise today to celebrate an 
important milestone in my district. Today, El Paso Electric is 
unveiling Newman Unit 6--a cutting edge, 228 megawatt natural gas 
combustion turbine generating power plant. This state-of-the-art 
facility will replace three older, less-efficient units with a robust 
energy supply equipped to meet the growing needs of the El Paso region.
  Situated at the Newman Power Station in El Paso, TX, this project 
exemplifies El Paso Electrics dedication to enhancing energy 
reliability and minimizing wasteful practices. By utilizing modern 
natural gas technology, this project will optimize gas usage and reduce 
water consumption by an impressive 600 million gallons annually.
  Additionally, alongside maintaining a robust natural gas power 
supply, this initiative makes significant investments in renewable 
energy. Such diversification is integral for fostering a resilient 
power grid fit for the demands of the 21st century.
  Supporting a strong energy sector is a key priority of mine in this 
Chamber. I fundamentally believe that energy security is national 
security and that safeguarding jobs, such as those generated by this 
project, is paramount. Witnessing the fruition of this development 
fills me with pride.
  I applaud El Paso Electric for their unwavering commitment to 
bolstering energy reliability and security in the El Paso region. Their 
tireless efforts ensure that our energy grid remains strong and can 
keep our lights on around the clock.
I rise to pay tribute to the distinguished 
life and extraordinary military career of General Edward Greer, a 
remarkable individual whose legacy has left an indelible mark on our 
nation, as he approaches his 100th birthday.
  Born in the coal-mining town of Gary, West Virginia, General Greers 
journey began at West Virginia State College in 1942, where he enrolled 
during an era of racial segregation. However, his education was 
interrupted by World War II, leading him to serve in the 777th Field 
Artillery Battalion, an all-Black unit. By the wars end, he had risen 
to the esteemed rank of Master Sergeant. Returning to civilian life, 
General Greer resumed his studies at West Virginia State College, where 
he met and married Jewell Means. Their union, forged on May 31, 1948, 
endured for more than 72 years.
  Commissioned as a Second Lieutenant in the Regular Army in 1940, 
General Greer sought stability in the military, serving with 
distinction for 33 years. His early assignments in Japan coincided with 
the outbreak of the Korean War, where he earned the Silver Star for 
valor. Promoted through the ranks, General Greers military career 
traversed Germany. Oklahoma, Kansas, and the Pentagon, witnessing the 
Armys integration and earning promotions to Major, Lieutenant Colonel, 
and Colonel. His family grew to include three children: Michael, 
Kenneth, and Gail.
  In 1970, Colonel Greer served in Vietnam before becoming a 
trailblazer in military history. Selected for promotion to Brigadier 
General in 1972, he joined an esteemed group of Black officers, 
contributing to the integration of the Armys general officer ranks. 
Retiring in 1976 after 33 years of dedicated service, General Greer 
made El Paso his home. With his beloved wife Jewell, he became an 
active member of the community, engaging in real estate sales and 
contributing to various civic boards.
  The Greers post-Army life was a testament to their commitment to 
service and community. It is with profound gratitude and respect that 
we honor General Edward Greers legacy, a legacy that exemplifies the 
highest ideals of duty, honor, and love for our great nation, and wish 
him a very happy 100th birthday.
today, I stand to honor Former 
State Representative Thomas Jasper, a gentleman near and dear to the 
citizens of New Orleans and Louisianas Second Congressional District, 
as he celebrates his 95th Birthday.
  Native New Orleanian Thomas Jasper was born on February 23, 1929, An 
ambitious and promising young man that attended Booker T. Washington 
Sr. High School in the 2nd Congressional District. After high school, 
he served in the United States Armed Forces and later graduated from 
Southern University at New Orleans. He is a notable accountant and 
professional, serving in several key administrative positions in city 
and state governments. He proudly and successfully served the Lower 
Nine Housing Development Corporation, Minority Business Development, 
and Louisiana State Office of Minority Affairs under the leadership of 
former Louisiana Governors Edwards and David Treen and former City of 
New Orleans Mayor Sidney Barthelemy.
  In 1976, he was elected to serve as Louisiana State Representative to 
House District 102 in the Lower Ninth Ward. He was a co-founding member 
of the Louisiana Legislative Black Caucus. He completed his tenure in 
1980. He consistently demonstrated servant leadership acumen by being 
elected to the New Orleans State Central Democratic Committee and 
Democratic National Convention as a delegate.
  From 2016 through 2021, it was an honor to have his support and 
insight as my trusted Advisor during my term as Louisiana State 
Senator. Mr. Jasper also was my trusted Advisor during my tenures at 
Councilman of District C in New Orleans, Louisiana from 1994 to 2002.
  Avid community leader Mr. Jasper can always be found helping others 
in the community, advising on business development, and providing 
referrals to resources.
  A pillar of Mr. Jaspers family upbringing is the biblical teachings 
regarding service to all Gods children. As a young man and throughout 
most of his adult years, Mr. Jasper was a member of the Historic Second 
Baptist Church, serving as a Sanctuary choir member under Rev. Thomas 
Nelson Washington. A man dedicated to the will of God, he was regularly 
found in Sunday school, singing in the Choir and being a guest soloist 
on church programs across the city, and he continues to do so today. 
Currently, he worships at the First Agape Baptist Church, where he 
serves as a senior deacon and treasurer under the ministry of the Rev. 
Eddie M. Payne. Mr. Jasper loves to minister in song. He favors the 
older spirituaIs like ``Ill Tell it Wherever I Go and ``King Jesus 
Will Roll All Burdens Away but is most inspired by ``What a Blessing 
in Jesus Ive Found.
  His favorite scripture is Romans 8:38-39 is his message to his 
children and grandchildren--``Be prayerful, have faith and trust in 
God, and let nothing separate you from the love of God, which is in 
Christ Jesus.
, devoted husband of 
Florence Harrell for 74 blessed years, and has reared three children, 
Gwendolyn Jasper Barnes, Nedra Jasper Alcorn, and the late Rev. Glenn 
Thomas Jasper. He is the proud grandfather of six grandchildren and 
doting great-grandfather of eight great-grandchildren.
a mighty man of service, and today, he continues to 
serve as my purpose-driven mentor and father figure. He has encouraged 
me through all of my dreams throughout my career. He is genuinely a 
patriarch to many who continue to cross his path and will always be a 
part of my journey as I lead the constituents of the 2nd Congressional 
District of Louisiana. He is my dear friend and mentor, and I hope to 
be the mentor to others as he has been for me.
  On this day, I wish my dear friend a Happy and Blessed Birthday, and 
may he see many more.
I rise to commemorate the 32nd anniversary of 
the massacre of hundreds of people in the town of Khojaly, Azerbaijan.
  On February 26, 1992, Armenian armed forces massacred over 600 
unarmed people--including 106 women, 63 children, and 70 elderly 
people--and left less than 2,000 survivors. Hundreds more became 
disabled due to their injuries. More than 100 children lost a parent 
and 25 children lost both parents. At least 8 families were entirely 
killed. This was the largest killing of ethnic Azerbaijani civilians 
during the Armenia-Azerbaijan conflict
  Although a cease-fire was negotiated in 1994, it is my hope that 
Armenia and Azerbaijan can come together and find peace. Long-term 
peace, security, and regional cooperation would greatly benefit the 
region and the world. As Azerbaijanis throughout the world commemorate 
the massacre and continue to grieve the loss of loved ones, I hope they 
can find peace amidst this tragedy.
in 1993, the state of Florida commissioned 
Professors Maxine D. Jones, Larry E. Rivers, David R. Colburn, William 
R. Rogers, and Tom Dye to write and submit to the Florida Board of 
Regents a documented report of what occurred at the site of Rosewood in 
Levy County Florida during the first week of January, 1923.
  The findings of that report can be found at: &lt;a href=http://
edocs.dlis.state.fl.us/fldocs/regents/rosewood.pdf&gt;http://
edocs.dlis.state.fl.us/fldocs/regents/rosewood.pdf&lt;/a&gt;.
I, along with the people of St. Louis, rise 
today to honor the exceptional career of Colonel Elvert L. Gardner. 
This March, Col. Gardner will retire with over 30 years of active duty 
military service.
  Col. Gardner is a St. Louis native who graduated from Cardinal Ritter 
College Prep High School in 1988. He was commissioned in May 1993 
through the Reserved Officer Training Corps at the distinguished 
Detachment 015, Tuskegee University, home of the Tuskegee Airmen. Upon 
receiving his commission as Second Lieutenant in 1993, Col. Gardner 
spent 26 years in the U.S. Air Force before transferring to the U.S. 
Space Force. In 2015, he was promoted to the rank of Colonel, further 
signifying his excellent leadership and resolve.
  As the Director of Space Strategy, Policy, and Plans at U.S. Space 
Force headquarters and the Pentagon, Col. Gardner consistently 
dedicated himself to supporting national security objectives. Other 
examples of his commitment to supporting our Nation include his roles

as Space Force Service Chair, National Security Studies Department 
Chair, and Assistant Professor at the Eisenhower School for National 
Security and Resource Strategy. In each of these positions, Col. 
Gardner has distinguished himself as an individual who leads with full 
intention to serve the community at large.
  Col. Gardner has demonstrated exceptional leadership, courage, 
perseverance, and hope throughout his career. His retirement is a well-
earned milestone over the course of his professional life. We thank 
Col. Gardner for his remarkable service to our country, and I know his 
beloved niece, our dear sister and friend, Cora Faith Walker, would be 
incredibly proud of her uncle and his outstanding career. On behalf of 
Missouris First District, I send my heartfelt congratulations to Col. 
Gardner on his retirement after 30 years of service in the U.S. 
military.
today I rise to honor Indiana State 
Representative for House District 92, Renee Pack. Prior to joining the 
Indiana General Assembly, she served in the United States Army for five 
years, where she trained and served as a behavioral specialist and was 
also certified in drug and alcohol counseling. Her training in the Army 
led her to a lifetime of service in our local schools, as a small 
business operator and now at the Indiana Statehouse.
  Since being elected to the Indiana House of Representatives in 2020, 
Renee Pack has led with courage and strength. She has become a champion 
for a more equal, and just environment for residents of her district 
and all Hoosiers. Her service in the Army has led her to where she is 
today, serving as the Ranking Member on the Veterans Affairs and Public 
Safety Committee. She also serves on the Committees on Commerce, Small 
Business and Economic Development, and Children and Human Affairs. She 
has invested her years in public service to uplift those in need, 
strengthen veteran services in Indiana, and advocate for equality under 
the law.

  Her service and training in the Army still have a lasting impact on 
her public service today. Her collective experiences inspired her to 
author Indiana House Bill 1188, prohibiting lifetime limitations for 
Medicaid recipients receiving treatment for substance abuse and 
addiction.
  Each month, our office recognizes women veterans who are often 
overlooked and underrepresented, especially women of color. African 
Americans have a long history serving our country, as the National 
Museum of African American History and Culture recognizes ``From the 
Revolutionary War to the War on Terror, African Americans have served 
in the United States military. In defending their country, they hoped 
to earn freedom and citizenship and contribute to a changed America 
where racial equality was possible.
  On this last day of Black History Month, I am proud to honor State 
Representative Renee Pack for her service to our country by giving her 
the Shelia Corcoran Hoosier Women Hero Award.
  I ask my colleagues to join me in recognizing State Representative 
and Hoosier Women Hero, Renee Pack.
today, we honor the selfless life of Bishop 
Carlton Pearson who passed away last November at the age of 70. Bishop 
Carlton Pearson was an evangelist, ministry leader, author, and award-
winning singer. He was raised in San Diego, California with five 
siblings. He is survived by them, his wife, and his two children.
  An expert in many crafts, his congregation often praised his diverse 
passions and the limitless communities impacted by his work. He 
preached what he called a gospel of inclusion. He saw all human life as 
an integral part of a broader community. He was welcomed in Synagogues, 
Islamic groups, Atheist and Agnostic organizations, and a variety of 
other spiritual communities. He felt a mandate to strive for peace 
through an emphasis on inclusion in spirituality and interfaith 
fellowship.
  I commend him again today and emphasize his teaching that we dont 
have to go along to get along. That we can mind many of the same things 
without necessarily having the same mind about everything. We honor the 
life of Bishop Carlton Pearson, the legacy he left wont be soon 
forgotten. I include in the Record this Rolling Stone Magazine memoriam 
about how he has inspired generations to come.

How Bishop Carlton Pearson Inspired a Generation of Singers and Gospel 
                                Artists

       Bishop Carlton Pearson, a renowned preacher, singer and 
     composer, known for his Live At Azusa albums, died on 
     November 19 after a battle with cancer in Tulsa, Oklahoma.
       His theology, known as the ``gospel of inclusion, 
     preached against homophobia and embraced the LGBTQ community, 
     but cost him his congregation and approval within the 
     evangelical community. However, his message of inclusion and 
     his denial of hell has become a model, and his impact in 
     gospel music continues to inspire new generations of artists.
       ``He has an album of hymns that people would sing in the 
     Black church for communion like `I Know it Was The Blood, or 
     his version of `Precious Memories. gospel artist and former 
     Destinys Child member Michelle Williams tells Rolling Stone, 
     referring to Pearsons Live At Azusa 2: Precious Memories 
     album from 1997. ``He amplified those songs and made them 
     mainstream for church.
       Pearson was born and raised in San Diego, California, where 
     his father and grandfather were preacher men in a storefront 
     ``heaven or hell Pentecostal church. After graduating high 
     school, he attended Oral Roberts University, an evangelical 
     Christian University, where Oral Roberts, a white preacher 
     who had the leading religious television broadcast in the 
     Seventies, was the schools founder. Roberts mentored Pearson 
     as he navigated the ministerial realm.
       Pearson left the school before graduating in 1977, starting 
     his own church, Higher Dimensions. With over 6,000 members, 
     it would make him one of the first Black mega church pastors, 
     bringing Black churches into a mainstream space in the 
     Nineties and 2000s.
       ``In the Seventies, here in the West, the church was on a 
     decline, says Larry Reid, a pastor, media personality and 
     friend to Pearson. ``You had evangelistic campaigns all over 
     the U.S., but it was fading away and Black people were not 
     leading it. We were the musicians and the singers. But 
     Carlton Pearson created a stage called Azusa and brought 
     Black Christians in and the white stations would play clips 
     from his platform.
       Pearsons Azusa Conferences, which were inspired by the 
     1906 revival that took place on Azusa Street in Los Angeles, 
     were a hybrid of preaching and music. It gave preachers, like 
     Joyce Meyers, Michael Pitts, Bishop T.D. Jakes, and gospel 
     heavyweights, such as Donnie Mcclurkin, the Clark Sisters, 
     and the late Lashun Pace, agency and a platform to showcase 
     their talents and introduce them to a wider audience of 
     people. The conference, which was held at Pearsons old 
     university, Oral Roberts, would host thousands of guests. For 
     those who could not attend, they were taped and sold via VHS, 
     which gave way to many successful careers in television 
     ministry and gospel music.
       ``I had always known his music for many years before I 
     became an artist, says Ricky Dillard, a renowned gospel 
     artist and composer, known for his choirs and directorial 
     abilities. ``He had a choir with him and that was influential 
     to me. He was out here doing it at an A-1 level, so everyone 
     was a fan. If youre a gospel music lover, theres no way 
     that you could not have heard the music of Bishop Carlton 
     Pearson.
       Pearsons album The Best of Azusa. . . Yet Holdin On is a 
     staple in the Black community. On the 14-track album, 
     featuring songs from his Azusa conference days, he has 
     an oratory track called ``Mother Sherman Story, in which 
     he recounts a question an elderly mother from his home 
     church would ask him, even as dementia began to set in: 
     ``You yet holding on?--The albums title.
       ``That meant many things, explains Williams. ``It meant 
     keep holding on to your faith and also meant keep holding on 
     to your morals and your standards.
       In the late Nineties, Pearson--who not only studied his 
     bible but also studied its roots, foundations, and original 
     language of Hebrew--came to a realization that would shake 
     the foundation of his faith and his social standing within 
     the church.
       ``When my little girl was an infant, I was watching the 
     evening news and the Hutus and the Tutsis were returning to 
     Rwanda from Uganda,? Pearson recalled on an episode of This 
     American Life from December 2005. ``Im watching these little 
     kids with swollen bellies, their skin is stretched. . . Their 
     hair is kind of red from malnutrition and they have flies on 
     the corner of their eyes and mouths.
       Pearson thought of his baby, who is now 27 year-old Majeste 
     Pearson--a pop and gospel singer--and his big screen 
     television and the plate of food he was in the middle of 
     eating. Knowing the culture of the people on the screen and 
     assuming they were not all Christian, he said, ``God, I dont 
     know how you can call yourself a loving, sovereign God and 
     allow these people to suffer this way and just suck them 
     right into hell. Pearson heard a voice saying ``Cant you 
     see theyre already there? Thats hell. You keep creating 
     that for yourselves, Im taking them into my presence. 
     Pearson had a realization: ``We do that to ourselves and to 
     each other, he recalled in the podcast episode.
       The next Sunday, he shared his revelation to his 
     congregation, urging them to stop

     telling people that they werent ``saved. Instead, he 
     wanted them to send a message that they were ``safe with 
     God.
       But this new theology of inclusion and universalism marked 
     his downfall within the evangelical mainstream. Congregants 
     left the church. Preachers like T.D. Jakes spoke out against 
     him; Jakes told Charisma Magazine, a popular Christian 
     publication, that Pearson was wrong and had incorrectly 
     interpreted the Bible. Many churches and leaders turned their 
     backs on him. He lost his church, both its members and the 
     building. He was banned from hosting the Azusa conference at 
     the Oral Roberts institution and Roberts, his former mentor, 
     remained silent. At the time, Pearson was also running for 
     the Mayor of Tulsa, the city with the worst race riot in 1922 
     known as the Black Wall Street massacre. He lost.
       ``I told Carlton that if he told them he believed there was 
     no such thing as hell and damnation, he will reduce this 
     weapon of fear based religion, which is the foundation of 
     religious institutions money, said Bishop Yvette Flunder, a 
     friend of Pearson and a same gender loving preacher and 
     singer who sung with The Hawkins Family. ``His colleagues and 
     the College of Bishops that he was a part of put him on blast 
     and said he was a heretic and excommunicated him.
       Charisma Magazine didnt let the issue rest. According to 
     Reid, they wrote about Pearson for two years, demonizing his 
     theology and teachings.
       ``He was deeply hurt and felt betrayed, his children 
     Majeste and Julian Pearson wrote in an email to Rolling 
     Stone. But Pearson stood by his beliefs. ``He internalized a 
     lot of it, resulting in him becoming physically sick. Around 
     that time, he had his first bout with cancer. We were nine 
     and 11 when we knew it was our last service.
       While no longer popular in the mainstream church, Pearsons 
     ministry continued through his church New Dimensions, where 
     he preached against homophobia and embraced the LGBTQ 
     community as members. He challenged scriptures used to 
     demonize and oppress their existence. He also authored books 
     like The Gospel of Inclusion and God Is Not a Christian, Nor 
     a Jew, Muslim, Hindu. . . . : God Dwells with Us, in Us, 
     Around Us, as Us. He also was a minister to many in person.
       ``Bishop Pearsons ministry was a mirror for me, says 
     Dillard. Back in 2005, Dillard had met Pearson leaving an 
     event and felt inclined to give him a ride back to Atlanta.
       ``Something very powerful happened in our moment together. 
     I was seeking God in a different way and I had come up with 
     translations that I needed confirmation from. I felt low in 
     spirit that I was not meeting the standards of the Word of 
     God. Bishop said something to me that changed my life that 
     day. He said `As others have judged you, you have now taken 
     on their judgment and you are judging yourself. It spoke to 
     my heart.
today I rise in memory of 
Chief Warrant Officer 4 Bryan Zemek, a Mississippi National Guardsman, 
who tragically lost his life when Apache Helicopter, Tail Number 52630, 
went down near Booneville, Mississippi Friday afternoon of February 23, 
2024.
  Bryan Zemek, at 36 years old, served his country with distinction for 
nearly two decades, demonstrating his courage and skill as a 
Standardization Instructor Pilot for Alpha Company, 1st Battalion, 
149th Aviation
  Regiment in Tupelo, Mississippi. His extensive experience included 
over 2450 flying hours in the Apache helicopter, showcasing his 
expertise in aircraft gunnery, weapon systems, combat arms, operations, 
and tactics.
  Beyond his military service, Bryan was a devoted family man, leaving 
behind his beloved wife Robyn and their four children, Ayden, Logan, 
Swayze, and Avery. He was not only a skilled aviator, but also an 
outdoorsman, marksman, and even a private plane owner. His love for 
boating, aviation, and serving as a civilian Emergency Medical Services 
pilot reflected his adventurous spirit and commitment to helping others
  Bryan embodied the values of faith, family, and patriotism. His 
dedication to his home state of Mississippi and to the United States of 
America exemplifies the true essence of an American hero. As we reflect 
on his life and legacy, let us hold his memory dear in our hearts and 
express our profound gratitude for his selfless service and ultimate 
sacrifice.
  In this time of sorrow, we offer our unwavering support and comfort. 
May his legacy endure as a beacon of courage and honor, reminding us of 
all the sacrifices made by those who serve our nation. God bless Chief 
Warrant Officer 4 Bryan Andrew Zemek, a proud Mississippian, and a true 
American hero. May he rest in peace, and may his spirit continue to 
inspire us all.
I rise today to honor the God-honoring life 
and generous impact of a Pikes Peak community stalwart--Gerald ``Jay 
Cimino, who died of natural causes on February 24, 2024, at the age of 
87. Jay truly was a pillar of the Pikes Peak region, both as a well-
known business innovator in the automobile industry as well as a 
beloved and visionary community builder. Jays leadership of the Phil 
Long dealerships impacted the automobile industry across the state of 
Colorado and his love for others led to the creation of numerous 
veteran-focused groups such as Mt. Carmel Veterans Service Center.
  Born in Trinidad, Colorado, Jay joined the Marine Corps out of high 
school. Following his service to our Nation, he moved back to Trinidad 
and attended Trinidad State Jr College and finished his bachelors 
degree in business administration at the University of Denver in 1960. 
Wasting no time after graduation, Jay married his wife, Emily, and they 
took an active role in their community. Jay became General Manager of 
Phil Long Ford in 1975 and rose up the ranks to President and CEO of 
the Phil Long Family of Dealerships. Throughout his time in the 
automobile industry, Jay lived out the exemplary values of community 
and customer service as no one had done before him. This emphasis on 
community service was the basis for how Jay used his time to make and 
do better for everyone around him.
  Jay invested in the economic growth of his hometown of Trinidad as 
well as his adopted home of Colorado Springs throughout his time at 
Phil Long Ford. Whether it was bringing automobile dealerships to new 
communities, creating academic scholarships, or helping build 
community-focused buildings, Jay took great pride in providing new 
opportunities and services for others.
  Perhaps Jays most impactful initiative was his creation of Mt. 
Carmel Health, Wellness and Community Center, Mt. Carmel Center of 
Excellence of Colorado, and Mt. Carmel Veterans Service Center which 
provides access to medical care and career change resources to our 
community and specifically our veterans. Jay truly modeled for all of 
us how to properly serve in the most caring and generous way for those 
who have served our nation.
  Jay and his wife Emily of more than fifty-five years enjoyed the 
blessings of their four children and eight grandchildren. The legacy of 
the Cimino family continues to have an impact in the Pike Peak region 
following in the steps of Jays vision and passion.
, I ask that my colleagues in Congress join me in honoring 
and celebrating the exemplary life of Jay Cimino whose fingerprints on 
the Pike Peak region will remain for the rest of time.
I rise to acknowledge the Ulster County 
Chamber of Commerces Leap of Kindness Day, on February 29, 2024.
  Leap of Kindness Day was started in 2016 by the Saratoga County 
Chamber of Commerce and has taken place on February 29th each Leap Year 
since. The goal of the day has always been to spend the extra day we 
are given every four years doing acts of kindness. This initiative has 
spread throughout the U.S., Canada, and Ireland to help those in need.
  Leap of Kindness Day offers community members a chance to do 
something kind for someone else. It motivates organizations, 
businesses, and communities to donate clothing, food, and money to 
local not-for-profit organizations.
  This day keeps communities rooted in their values and spreads love to 
neighbors. Growing up in Ulster County, I have seen how giving, 
dedicated, and kind my neighbors in the Hudson Valley are to those 
around them. I hope that everyone can take part in such a great 
initiative, participating alongside their communities to help others, 
not just today but every day as we all work to spread more kindness.
  I want to recognize Ward Todd and Jess Davis, President and Vice 
President of the Ulster County Regional Chamber of Commerce, for their 
work to make Leap of Kindness Day such a meaningful day for our 
community.
RECOGNIZING MOLLY MILLERS ELECTION TO THE INTERNATIONAL TECHNOLOGY AND 
                            of pennsylvania
I rise today to congratulate Molly Miller 
on her election to the presidency of the International Technology and 
Engineering Educators Association.
  Molly is an experienced technology educator at Penn Manor High School 
who is dedicated to the ideal of technological literacy among students. 
In an ever-changing world, teachers like Molly prepare students for 
careers and life beyond the walls of school that will be defined by the 
rapidly developing technological revolution.
  Mollys recent election to the presidency of the International 
Technology and Engineering Educators Association, where she will serve 
during the 2025-2026 term, comes after years of working with the 
Associations Pennsylvania board.
  In her new role, Molly will oversee 1,500 members worldwide, ensuring 
that the next generations innovative skillset will accommodate the 
needs of the 21st century.
, I want to commend Molly for her dedication to her 
students and preparing them to enter the technological workforce. I 
wish her all the best in her new position, in addition to her work at 
Penn Manor High School.
I rise today to honor and remember U.S. 
Air Force General Earl T. OLoughlin, who passed away November 10, 
2023, at the age of 93 years old. General OLoughlin was a 
distinguished four-star general, who commenced his military journey 
during the Cold War in 1951.
  An exceptional pilot, he navigated various aircraft, ranging from the 
B-29 to the KC-135. Over the course of his career, he accumulated 
approximately 6,000 flying hours, including 224 combat hours. Beyond 
his military achievements, Earl was a devoted husband to Thelma 
Bentley, a loving father to his daughter, Kris Rudin, brother, 
grandfather, great-grandfather, uncle, and a cherished friend.
  The general emphasized the mantra ``freedom isnt free throughout 
his entire life. Among his numerous accolades are the Distinguished 
Service Medal, Legion of Merit, Distinguished Flying Cross, the Bronze 
Star Medal, Meritorious Service Medal, Air Medal, and Air Force 
Commendation Medal adorned with four oakleaf clusters.
  In the hearts of the Tucson community and the residents of District 
6, General OLoughlin remains a true hero.
  We extend our gratitude for his dedicated service, and I am eternally 
thankful for his contributions.