I rise today to talk about a piece of 
property in South Central Alaska known as the Bering River Coal Field 
located in the magnificent Copper River Delta. This issue goes back to 
the days of Theodore Roosevelt as a conservation effort.
  The United States government has the opportunity to purchase the 
mineral rights to this field.
  This Congress provided the U.S. Forest Service $8 million to buy the 
Bering River Coal Field through the Land and Water Conservation Fund, 
but the appraisal came in at $6 million.
  The Korean Alaska Development Company that owns it will sell for $8 
million, and I want to thank a gentleman, Joe Shinn, and the KADCO 
board of directors for staying at the table.
  We have an opportunity, and I believe the members on both sides of 
the aisle would agree if you could by acclamation to give the Forest 
Service the ability to purchase this remarkable property for 
conservation. But the United States government cannot pay more than 
appraised value unless we in Congress authorize them to do that.
  The difference is between $6 million and $8 million dollars, and I 
ask my colleagues, if not now then, in the future, to help the United 
States of America to set aside the Bering River Coal Field in 
perpetuity for all future generations to enjoy.
I rise today to celebrate the life and 
legacy of WWII hero and U.S. Navy Corpsman Jack Gutman, who passed away 
just days short of his 99th birthday.
  Born December 19, 1925, in San Francisco, California, Jack was the 
third of nine children. His father, who spoke seven languages, served 
in World War I, after which he worked at the Grand Hotel in Shanghai, 
China. Gutmans mother, from a wealthy Russian family, was a ballerina. 
When her family fled the Bolsheviks, they went to Shanghai, and the two 
met, married, and settled in America.
  The Great Depression was a difficult time for the family and his 
father had to travel to make a living selling apples. By the time Jack 
was a teenager, the family was living in New York. Jack was hanging out 
with his high school friends when the news of Pearl Harbor broke. 
Gutman enlisted right away at age 17 as a Navy seaman. After boot camp, 
Gutman thought he was going to be an aerial radio man--but an urgent 
need arose for medics, and his training was diverted.
  At age 18, Corpsman 1st Class Gutman provided treatment to the 
wounded and dying on the beaches of Normandy on D-Day and at some of 
the bloodiest battles throughout the European and Pacific theaters. 
Gutman vividly remembers when his unit landed on Utah Beach on June 6, 
1944. With bullets flying, bombs exploding, and men dying all around 
him, Corpsman Gutman helped those he could, giving shots of morphine, 
applying bandages and tourniquets, and providing words of comfort to 
soldiers who died in his arms.
  Gutman would later write a book about his experience titled ``One 
Veterans Journey to Heal the Wounds of War. His story was recorded 
by the National World War II Museum in New Orleans, Louisiana. Jack was 
also interviewed as part of a documentary film about the 75th 
anniversary of D-Day.
  A quote from his book best describes the impact the war had on his 
life: ``I went into the war with a fervor to fight for my country and 
protect our freedom, but the experience had been nothing like what I 
thought when I signed up to join the Navy. Back at home, I thought 
constantly of the men that had died overseas. I wondered how and why I 
survived. There I was, a young teenager thrown into a crazy war with 
thousands of young men dying in front of me. I never dreamed it would 
be that awful, and that those horrifying images would stick with me now 
that I was safely at home, and for years to come.
  After his combat experiences, Gutman decided to become a doctor. He 
took night school classes, and before algebra, would tell jokes. He met 
his wife, Mary Jo, in that class, and they were married June 22, 1947, 
a union that lasted 77 years. Once his children came along, he never 
made it to medical school.
  Throughout his life, Jack kept quiet about the flashbacks that 
haunted him ever since returning home from war. As a band-aid to cover 
his recurring nightmares, he immersed himself

in his work, including performing as a successful comedian under the 
name of Jackie Walker.
  When things took a turn for the worse, he finally turned to the VA 
for help and was seen by a therapist, who diagnosed him with post-
traumatic stress disorder and helped him receive treatment and VA 
benefits.
  With a new lease on life, Jack began helping other veterans 
experiencing PTSD by encouraging them to seek support to live happy, 
productive lives.
  Gutmans valiant service to both his country and his life of service 
to his fellow veterans serves as an inspiration for us all. For this 
reason, I ask my colleagues to join me celebrating the life and legacy 
of Jack Gutman, a true American hero.
I rise today to recognize and congratulate 
my friend and colleague, Chair of the Rules Committee, Dr. Michael 
Burgess, on his retirement from the House of Representatives after a 
22-year career representing the folks of Texas 26th congressional 
district.
  With his background as an OB-GYN doctor and the most senior medical 
doctor in the

House, Dr. Burgess has been an important voice on every important 
healthcare debate during his two decades of service in the House. Ive 
had the pleasure of working closely with Dr. Burgess on the Energy and 
Commerce Committee for a long time, and whenever a bill related to 
healthcare was being debated or discussed, I knew I could count on Dr. 
Burgess to provide clarity and insight from an experienced physicians 
perspective. Dr. Burgess and I share a passion for our military 
servicemembers and for many Congresses have introduced the MISSION Zero 
initiative together to improve trauma care between the military and 
civilians. Seeing this bill signed into law was a major achievement 
together and I intend to ensure this program continues in his legacy. 
He has accomplished some truly amazing things during his time here 
including lowering drug costs, reigning in government waste, cutting 
taxes, and expanding healthcare options for folks around the country. 
Since being nominated as Chairman of the Rules Committee, Dr. Burgess 
has worked tirelessly to ensure good legislation makes it to the floor 
and has been instrumental in our accomplishments in the 118th Congress.
  I would like to thank Dr. Burgess for his unwavering commitment to 
conservative principles and his sound leadership. On a personal note, I 
appreciate his friendship and counsel over the years. While his 
colleagues and the people in his district are sure to miss Dr. Burgess 
in Congress, I know he is looking forward to spending more time with 
his family back home in his beloved Texas.
, please join me in congratulating my friend Dr. Michael 
Burgess on his retirement from the House of Representatives after 22 
years of exemplary service to the people of Texas 26th congressional 
district.
I rise today to honor Board 
Director Dee Rosario as he prepares for retirement after an 
extraordinary 37 years of dedicated service to the East Bay Regional 
Park District. A proud native of the East Bay, Dees journey began at 
Mt. Eden High School in Hayward, followed by an associates degree from 
Chabot Community College and further studies at California State 
University, East Bay. His deep roots in this community have shaped both 
his personal and professional life, driving a career that has had a 
profound and lasting impact on our region.
  Dees career with the Park District began in 1975, where he took on a 
series of vital roles, including park ranger, firefighter, fire 
lieutenant, and ultimately, park supervisor of Reinhardt Redwood 
Regional Park. His unwavering commitment to preserving our natural 
resources and serving the public has left an indelible mark on the East 
Bay community.
  During the 1991 Oakland Firestorm, his bravery and leadership were 
instrumental in mitigating the devastation. His steadfast dedication to 
both protecting lives and safeguarding our natural landscapes proved 
invaluable during that critical time, demonstrating his remarkable 
courage and deep sense of responsibility.
  In November 2016, Dee transitioned to a new chapter as a Board 
Director, where his visionary leadership has shaped the direction of 
the Park District. Notably, he co-chaired Measure FF, a successful 
initiative that secured crucial funding for park improvements, wildfire 
prevention, and public safety--investments that will benefit 
generations to come. Dees exceptional contributions to the Park 
District were recently recognized with the 2024 California Special 
Districts Association Board Member of the Year award, a fitting honor 
for his tireless work and dedication.
  One of Dees most lasting legacies is his role in renaming Redwood 
Regional Park in honor of Aurelia Reinhardt, a pioneering figure in the 
Park Districts history. This thoughtful and meaningful tribute not 
only celebrated Reinhardts contributions but also underscored Dees 
commitment to preserving the rich heritage of our community and our 
parks.
  Throughout his career, Dee has exemplified what it means to be a true 
leader. He has consistently sought to cultivate growth, creativity, and 
compassion in others, mentoring the next generation of public servants 
to continue his legacy of excellence and service. His belief that 
leadership is about empowering others will continue to resonate long 
after his retirement.
  On behalf of the entire community, I extend our deepest gratitude to 
Board Director Dee Rosario for his outstanding service, leadership, and 
unwavering commitment to enhancing our natural and recreational 
resources. His legacy will continue to inspire us all.
today I want to remember the beautiful life 
of Rachel Abraham of Mamaroneck. Rachel passed recently at the young 
age of 25 from complications due to pulmonary hypertension, a condition 
she was diagnosed with at birth.
  Our community in Mamaroneck and across New Yorks 16th district is 
devastated by Rachels passing. I want to send love and strength to 
Rachels parents, Deborah and Stephen, her siblings, Leah and Joshua, 
and her fiance, Dylan. I know that they are proud of Rachels 
incredible life and all that she was able to accomplish.
  After graduating from Mamaroneck High School, Rachel attended 
American University and was in the process of getting her masters 
degree from George Washington University. She was also working at the 
Healthcare Information and Management Systems Society as a Government 
Relations Manager, pursuing her goal of changing healthcare in the 
United States. Before her time at HIMSS, she worked for the National 
Council for Mental Wellbeing and ADvancing States and interned here in 
Congress.
  We are all grateful for the contributions Rachel made to improving 
our healthcare across the country, work informed by her own experiences 
with the healthcare system throughout her life. Her commitment to 
public service and advocating for others is clear and we are all better 
for it.
  My thoughts are with her family, friends, and loved ones in this 
difficult time. Rachel was a beautiful soul and an incredible part of 
our Mamaroneck community. It has been an honor to represent her and her 
family.
I rise today to honor Rhonda Solis, a 
distinguished member of the Colorado State Board of Education, who has 
served her community with passion, integrity, and an unwavering 
commitment to improving educational opportunities for all students. As 
she concludes her tenure on the Board, I want to recognize her 
accomplishments, advocacy, and tireless dedication to our schools, our 
students, and our educators in Colorado.
  Rhonda Solis has been a leader and a visionary on the Colorado State 
Board of Education. Representing her community with steadfast 
dedication, she has worked to ensure that every child has access to a 
quality education. Through her commitment to equity, inclusion, and 
academic excellence, Ms. Solis has advanced policies that have shaped 
our educational landscape and improved outcomes for students across the 
state.
a fierce advocate for underrepresented 
communities, promoting programs and resources that uplift students of 
all backgrounds. She has championed initiatives that address the unique 
challenges faced by English Language Learners and low-income students, 
striving to create an education system that serves all children fairly. 
Her voice on the Board has consistently reflected her deep belief that 
every student deserves a chance to succeed, no matter their zip code or 
background.
  In addition to her role on the Board, Ms. Solis has been active in 
her local community, inspiring and mentoring countless students, 
parents, and educators. Her work has extended beyond policy, touching 
lives and fostering an environment of compassion, respect, and 
understanding. She has earned the gratitude of those she serves, and 
her legacy will be felt for years to come.
  As we celebrate Ms. Solis dedication and contributions, I want to 
express my deepest gratitude for her service to Colorado. She has set a 
standard of excellence and integrity in public service, and her work 
has left an indelible mark on our state. On behalf of the people of 
Colorados 8th Congressional District, I thank Rhonda Solis for her 
years of service, her passion for education, and her commitment to a 
brighter future for all our children.
I rise today to honor Mr. 
Tony Fletcher, a dedicated advocate in our Napa community. For thirty-
five years, Mr. Fletcher has demonstrated unwavering commitment to 
enriching the lives of the blind and visually impaired (BVI) through 
his work with the Enchanted Hills Camp for the Blind.
  Born and raised in Napa, Mr. Fletcher dedicated his career to serving 
our community and ensuring that visually impaired individuals have 
access to resources. Mr. Fletchers journey with Enchanted Hills Camp 
began in 1989, marking the start of a lifelong career with LightHouse 
for the Blind. Later, in 1995 he earned a Master of Arts in Special 
Education with an emphasis on Orientation and Mobility from San 
Francisco State University. Mr. Fletcher is retiring after thirty-five 
years of serving Lighthouse for the Blind which oversees Enchanted 
Hills Camp concluding his career as the Senior Director of Services.
  Under Mr. Fletchers leadership, Enchanted Hills Camp has flourished 
as a safe, nurturing, and empowering environment where blind campers of 
all ages could explore, learn, and experience the joys of a traditional 
summer camp. Mr. Fletchers vision and determination extended beyond 
the campgrounds, as he built partnerships with the County of Napa. In 
2017, when devastating wildfires destroyed much of Enchanted Hills 
Camp, Mr. Fletcher in partnership with County Supervisor Ryan Gregory 
and the LightHouse organization, helped rebuild the camp. Today, 
Enchanted Hills Camp continues to be a fully accessible and inclusive 
retreat where blind, deafblind, and low-vision campers continue to 
thrive.
, I thank Mr. Fletcher for his remarkable service to the 
Napa community and the BVI population. Mr. Fletchers work has had a 
profound impact on generations of students. His dedication has 
cultivated a legacy of resilience and compassion that will benefit our 
community for years to come. It is fitting and proper that we honor him 
here today.
I rise today to honor the life and legacy 
of United States Army Corporal Warren J. Winne, Sr.
  Warren was born on February 17, 1931, in Albany, New York, to Lyman 
and Gladys Winne. He grew up alongside his siblings: Franklin, Eugene, 
Eileen, and Dorothy. Warren started his education in Rensselaer, New 
York, and later enrolled at East Greenbush High School before enlisting 
in the United States Army on May 3, 1948.
  Warren served on active duty with the Army from 1948 to 1952 and 
earned the rank of Corporal during his military career. Corporal Winne 
was a member of the 7th Infantry Division during the Korean War until 
his Honorable Discharge in 1952. Upon returning to civilian life, he 
married his wife Mary on September 21, 1952, at St. Johns Church in 
Rensselaer and began a career as a pipe insulator for the Johns 
Manville Company.
  Warren established deep roots within his community. He was a proud 
volunteer firefighter with the Clinton Heights Fire Department, a 
member of the Melvin Roads American Legion Post No. 1231, and the 
Umpire-in-Chief of the East Greenbush Girls Softball Organization. His 
commitment to the softball community was recognized with the dedication 
of the East Greenbush Girls Softball field in his honor. Warren was 
also an active member of the Asbestos Union No. 40, demonstrating his 
solidarity with his fellow workers. In his free time, Warren was a 
skilled hunter and avid fisherman. Above all, Warren cherished his time 
spent with his four children: Carol, Sandra, Colleen, and Warren Jr.
  On behalf of New Yorks 21st Congressional District, it is an honor 
to recognize the extraordinary life of Corporal Warren J. Winne, Sr. 
and the enduring legacy of his character, selflessness, and dedication 
to his country and community.
I rise to honor the life of a special man, 
Robert ``Bob Gable, of Frankfort, Kentucky. Mr. Gable passed away on 
November 29, 2024, at the age of 90.
, grew up in Oregon and Arizona, 
and graduated from Stanford University. He served as an officer in the 
United States Navy. Mr. Gable and his wife Emily moved to Stearns, 
Kentucky, where they raised their three children. He ran The Stearns 
Lumber &amp; Coal Co. founded by his great-grandfather.
  In 1964, Mr. Gables political activity began when he worked on 
Howard Bakers first campaign for the U.S. Senate in Tennessee. He then 
worked on the successful gubernatorial campaign of Kentuckys Louie 
Nunn. Following the election, Mr. Gable was appointed as the state 
parks commissioner and the family moved to Frankfort. Gable ran 
unsuccessfully for U.S. Senate in 1972. When his party needed someone 
to run for governor in 1975 against incumbent Julian Caroll, Gable 
agreed to enter the race. He ran for governor again in 1995 and was 
unsuccessful in the primary.
1986, at a time when Republicans were vastly outnumbered. A strong and 
unwavering leader, he began to lay the groundwork for changing the 
political landscape in Kentucky. His enthusiasm, optimism, and gracious 
demeanor never diminished. He took a close personal interest in 
candidates and party leaders, giving expert advice and counsel. Over 
the years he served as a mentor for countless young people with an 
interest in politics.
2017. He is survived by his 
three children James, Elizabeth, and John and his two grandchildren.
  Bob Gable was a great patriot, one of my most valued political 
mentors, and a true Kentucky gentleman. I am most grateful for his 
loyal and genuine friendship, his sound advice, never-fail positive 
attitude, and kind, dignified manner. It is my honor to lift up his 
life before the House of Representatives.
I would like to recognize Major Mario 
Flores, U.S. Army, for his outstanding work on behalf of the Department 
of Defense. Major Flores served as a Department of Defense legislative 
fellow in the U.S. Senate, and later as a congressional liaison for the 
Army Reserve. Mario commissioned in the United States Army in 2011 
through the Reserve Officers Training Corps (ROTC) program at DePaul 
University, Chicago, Illinois where he received a B.S. in Business and 
later an M.S. in Legislative Affairs from George Washingtdn University.
  Through various assignments with 3rd Special Forces Group, the Joint 
Chiefs of Staff Joint Targeting Directorate, and Special Operations 
Command, Mario has made direct contributions to the U.S. National 
Security Strategy and National Defense Strategy. Mario specializes in 
strategic and tactical targeting operations and is a graduate of the 
Joint Targeting School, the Joint Special Operations Universitys 
Special Operations Intelligence Course, and the Special Forces Combat 
Course--Support, and the Basic Airborne Course.
  Mario is also a committed advocate for our Nations veterans. In 
2020, Mario was appointed by then-Virginia Governor Northam to serve a 
four-year appointment on the Virginia State Board on Veterans Services. 
In this role, he is responsible for advising the Virginia Department of 
Veterans Services on relevant policies in support of Virginias 
veterans.
  In addition to his military service, Marios civilian background 
includes extensive government and private sector experience including 
being a Public Policy Congressional Fellow for the Congressional 
Hispanic Caucus Institute Fellowship Program, having various roles at 
the U.S. Department of Homeland Security, and joining General Dynamics 
Information Technology. Following his completion of his next level of 
military education in early 2025, he will be returning to the civilian 
workforce while also continuing his service in the U.S. Army Reserve.
  Mario has been instrumental as an Army Reserve congressional liaison, 
especially working with my office to support Fort Knox. I thank Mario 
for his dedicated service, for his professionalism, and for his 
passionate service to our country and to our community. I also want to 
thank his wife, Jazmine, and I wish them both the best in their future 
endeavors.
I rise today to recognize an 
extraordinary group of individuals from Pennsylvanias First 
Congressional District--people who has gone above and beyond the call 
of duty in service to both our community and our country. It is with 
great respect and admiration that I recognize several outstanding 
representatives of the Newtown Business Community as some of our 
districts distinguished Hometown Heroes.
  Matt Arlen
  Richard Fekete
  Kathleen McCafferty
  Gina Santoro
  Hometown Heroes are not defined by titles or accolades, but by the 
quiet power of their actions. They are distinguished by their 
unwavering integrity, the strength of their character, and their 
steadfast commitment to the people and places they serve. They are the 
foundation upon which our communities stand--the ones who lift others 
up, inspire hope, and, in doing so, call us all to higher standards of 
service and compassion. This group of remarkable individuals have 
embodied this spirit in ways that words can scarcely capture.
  In 2021, Newtown business owners Gina Santoro, Richard Fekete, Matt 
Arlen, and Kathleen McCafferty approached Main Street Founder Keith 
Fenimore with an idea to bring our community together in support of 
local breast cancer patients. Their idea was to host a block party 
event that drives community members to come out and shop locally, with 
all proceeds going to Main Street, whose programs help local breast 
cancer patients and their families with food assistance, integrative 
services, counseling, therapy, out-of-pocket expenses, treatment 
transportation, comfort bags, treatment center support, and more. And 
so, the business owners along State Street changed their exterior 
lights with pink bulbs, hosted their first Light the Night Pink Block 
Party, and raised over $8,000. Seeing the impact they were able to 
have, the Newtown Business Community collectively decided to continue 
and grow their efforts and hosted their second Block Party in 2022, 
which raised $17,000. And in 2023, in an awe-inspiring show of unity 
and compassion, this incredible group of local entrepreneurs rallied 
together once more and raised over $70,000--the most money ever raised 
and donated by a single event to the Main Street organization.
  In times of uncertainty, it is the work of individuals like Gina, 
Richard, Matt, and Kathleen that reminds us of the power of the human 
spirit. Their service, given without expectation of recognition, stands 
as a testament to the belief that one individuals dedication can 
ripple through the lives of many, sparking change, fostering 
resilience, and inspiring hope. Today, we honor them not just for their 
remarkable deeds but for who they are--true heroes in every sense of 
the word.
  On behalf of Pennsylvanias First Congressional District, I extend my 
deepest gratitude to these individuals for their extraordinary service. 
I ask my colleagues to join me in honoring this exceptional 
organization, whose leadership and spirit of service will inspire 
generations to come. May their example remind us of the boundless 
potential within each of us to make our communities, country, and world 
a better place.
I rise today to recognize an 
outstanding constituent from my district, Guido P. DiFrancesco. He is a 
current resident of the Lutheran Community of Telford, Pennsylvania. 
Born in Philadelphia on December 17, 1924, Guido is celebrating his 
100th birthday today.
  He grew up on Mechanic Street in the Germantown section of 
Philadelphia with his four brothers and five sisters. At age 8, he 
constructed his own shoeshine box and started his own shoeshine 
business to help provide food for his parents and siblings. Guido had 
an amazing singing voice as a child, and he cultivated his love of 
music when he could by performing at school functions, weddings, and 
local night clubs. He attended Germantown High School until the 
Depression required him to leave high school and seek employment to 
help support his family.
  As a teenager, he held several jobs including the Philadelphia Steel 
Mill and the famous Victor Harmonica factory where he learned to 
construct and play the harmonica before he entered the United States 
Army in 1941. He sailed to England on the RMS Mauretania where he 
entertained the troops with his gift of singing. He landed in Weymouth, 
England and prepared for the invasion of Normandy.
  On D-Day, with G-Company, he landed on Omaha Beach with the First 
Infantry Division (The Big Red One), 18th Infantry Regiment. He was a 
Browning Automatic Rifle (BAR) Marksman and fought across France for 6 
months in hedge row to hedge row battles until he finally reached 
Belgium. He became deathly ill and was hospitalized there and then 
transferred to a hospital in England. While recuperating in England, he 
entertained the patients with his singing. He eventually came back to 
America and continued his convalescence and his singing at the 
Convalescent Hospital in Camp Upton, New York until he was honorably 
discharged and returned home in the spring of 1943.
  After he returned home, he married and lived on Boyer Street in 
Germantown and eventually moved to Horsham, Pennsylvania in 1952. He 
held several manufacturing positions including a plant manager position 
at Huntingdon Industries for 30 years and Mac Electric in Glenside for 
10 years. He was also self-employed as a home-improvement specialist 
until he officially retired at age 85. Guido was an involved member of 
the Warrington Lions for many years and worked tirelessly at their 
events.
  Guido finally received his high school diploma at age 93. His work 
ethic and ingenuity are exemplary. He was devoted to his first wife, 
Rose, who died in 1976 and his second wife, Kitty, who died in 2019. He 
is a proud parent, grandparent, and great-grandparent of a blended 
family including a daughter and

son-in-law, a stepson, two stepdaughters and sons-in-law, ten 
grandchildren, and twenty-five great-grandchildren. He is a loving role 
model to his family and is a living history of someone who served our 
country so valiantly.
  Our Nation owes Guido a debt that can never be repaid. We wish Guido 
countless blessings, and I remain deeply appreciative to Guido 
DiFrancesco for his life of service and sacrifice for our community, 
district, and country. His commitment to his fellow neighbors, 
veterans, and service members alike is a testament to his character and 
spirit. I am more than honored to recognize him today and wish him 
nothing but the best for his 100th birthday and the future beyond.
the U.S. House of Representatives 
unexpectedly lost a true public servant this week. My Chief of Staff, 
George Cecala, served with me from the day I was sworn into office on 
January 3, 2009, until his life was cut short earlier this week, 
suffering from a heart attack at the young age of 49.
  George was a loving husband and father and leaves behind his wife 
Jennifer, whom he cherished and their daughter Genny who was the joy of 
his life. He also leaves a record of remarkable and sacrificial service 
to this institution and to the people of Floridas Space and Treasure 
Coasts.
  Whether it is Kennedy Space Center, Patrick Space Force Base, Port 
Canaveral or our beautiful beaches, citrus groves or improvements to 
our highways or airports, George had a hand in it.
  I saw both gentle care and dogged tenacity as George worked 
tirelessly against what seemed insurmountable odds to secure the safe 
return of abducted children from a war-torn region of the world to 
their grieving mothers.
  To those who worked with George he was always encouraging. When 
someone was troubled or struggling, George was always there to offer a 
word of encouragement.
  George was always attentive to the needs of those around him--the 
colleague sitting beside him, the visitor who just walked in the office 
door, the intern looking for that first job on the Hill, or the 
constituent on the other end of the line, calling the office to tell 
George how to fix Washington. George always went out of his way to 
serve others--the hallmark of a public servant.
  He loved his Lord and Savior. He loved his church. He filled our 
office with stories of delight over Gennys latest achievements and her 
excitement over lifes joys. And, he loved his community, even running 
for a seat in the Maryland House of Delegates.
  The House of Representatives is a better place because of George 
Cecala. George will be deeply missed.