I rise today to recognize the 150th 
anniversary of Texarkana, Texas.
  On December 8, 2023, the City of Texarkana celebrates its 
sesquicentennial anniversary--thats 150 years of bringing together the 
best that Texas and Arkansas have to offer. Two states, one city. Its 
twice as nice. And, it is a great place to call home. This remarkable 
milestone is a testament to the values, resilience, culture, and rich 
heritage of the citizens of Texarkana for fifteen decades.
  Since its founding in 1873, Texarkana has grown from a small 
settlement along the Texas-Arkansas border to a thriving city that 
stands as a beacon of innovation, progress, and unity. The citys 
commitment to fostering a strong sense of community and preserving its 
unique State Line heritage is unsurpassed. From its vibrant 
manufacturing and industrial base, support for the Red River Army 
Depot, and its deep roots in agriculture to its investments in 
education, health care, technology, infrastructure, and planning, 
Texarkana stands as a shining example of what can be achieved when a 
community comes together with a shared vision and a commitment to 
excellence.
  I urge my colleagues to join me in recognizing and celebrating the 
150th anniversary of Texarkanas founding. Congratulations to Texarkana 
on this momentous milestone. May the next 150 years be filled with 
continued growth and prosperity. Happy anniversary, Texarkana.
I rise today to honor the life and legacy 
of my dear friend and constituent, Oscar Ortiz, a devoted organizer and 
champion for educational equity. Oscar was a visionary: he fought for a 
just, inclusive future where everyone thrives. He was a beloved 
husband, father, brother, son, and respected member of the Illinois 
Third Congressional District community.
  Born in our great City of Chicago on April 21, 1962, to Benito and 
Mirta Ortiz, Oscar dedicated his life to empowering our community 
through education. He believed that education was a powerful tool to 
build a just future. He knew education could unlock our collective 
potential and enable us to realize our dreams. With that in mind, Ortiz 
became an elementary and high school teacher, helping our young people 
find their power and joy in learning. Whether it was at Jahn and Lowell 
Elementary Schools or Jefferson Alternative School, el maestro Ortiz 
was always present for all his students, their parents, and faculty.
  His desire to serve our community and defend public education in 
Chicago led him to join the Chicago Teachers Union (CTU) in May 2003, 
where he quickly became a committed and active member, never missing a 
meeting or event. There, Oscar served as a sergeant-at-arms, as the 
Lowell delegate, and as a member of the Legislative Committees, always 
with the intention of advancing social justice and equity through 
education.
  Oscar generously committed his time on earth to countless social 
justice causes. He believed in the power of organized communities and 
worked tirelessly to build a better future for Chicago and our nation. 
I, personally, will miss his calls to action and the way he could stir 
our passions and stoke our courage on the bullhorn at direct actions. 
May his passion for change and love of community always guide us. I 
will miss him dearly, and I know that countless others will, too. He 
was a true, loyal friend.

  His wife, Sabina; sons, Gabriel and Daniel; brother Ed; parents, 
Benito and Mirta; all his loved ones, and to the entire CTU family, are 
in my heart and in my prayers. Together, as we mourn his passing, let 
us celebrate the blessing he was in all of our lives, the impact he had 
on our community, and the mark he has left in our great City of 
Chicago. Oscar vive, la lucha sigue. Rest in power, Oscar.
since 2016 Charlene Maher has served as the 
president and CEO of Blue Cross of Idaho. Charlene came to Idaho with 
decades of experience in multiple different facets of the healthcare 
industry. This broad range of understanding has made her an invaluable 
asset to the company and to Idahos larger business community.
  As a trained nurse herself, Charlene is keenly aware of the 
importance of ensuring communities have quality and affordable 
healthcare options. Her innovative approach and her dedication to 
improving access to healthcare for all Idahoans has truly distinguished 
Charlene as a leader in the industry, as evidenced by her seat on the 
Blue Cross Blue Shield Association Board of Directors, her time as 
president of the Idaho Association of Health Plans, her participation 
as a member of the Boise Metro Chamber of Commerce Board of Directors, 
and her contributions to various other state and national industry 
groups.
  Charlenes contribution to Idahos healthcare landscape throughout 
her time as CEO of Blue Cross of Idaho has been immense. I am grateful 
for her work and wish her the best of luck in her retirement.
I rise to congratulate Charles J. 
Hardy for being named a Knight of the Legion of Honor, Frances highest 
civilian honor.
  Hardy joined the 282nd Engineer Combat Battalion on July 16, 1943, 
and was one of many brave soldiers who risked their lives during the 
Second World War. He fought valiantly in the battle of Saint-Malo and 
captured enemy submarine pens throughout his time on the Western front. 
He also contributed to the liberation of the Ardennes, the Rhineland, 
Central Europe, and France. During these grueling compaigns, Hardy 
consistently demonstrated fearlessness and determination.
  Today, Hardy will be remembered and honored for his courageous 
service 79 years ago by receiving Frances highest honor.
I rise today to honor the 
undefeated Florida State University Seminole football team, who 
recently secured the 2023 ACC Championship title.
  Under Head Coach Mike Norvells leadership, the Seminoles are 13-0 
despite a devastating injury that prematurely ended the collegiate 
career of Quarterback Jordan Travis. This team plays with their hearts, 
and it shows. Throughout this season, theyve displayed incredible 
grit, determination, and perseverance even when the odds were against 
them.
  Sadly, the College Football Playoff Selection Committee failed to 
recognize this teams incredible talent by excluding them from the 
2023-24 College Football Playoffs. This was a devastating blow to the 
team and the city of Tallahassee, who proudly displayed the Seminole 
spirit all season.
  Its a shame that an undefeated team, who earned every bit of their 
perfect season, wont get a shot in the College Football Playoffs. Make 
no mistake, Floridas Second Congressional District knows our Seminoles 
are champions even if the selection committee denies them a chance to 
prove it.
  I congratulate Florida State University on a perfect season. I thank 
them for playing with their hearts and making our district proud. Go 
Noles.
RECOGNIZING JEANICE SWIFTS SERVICE TO THE CHILDREN OF ANN ARBOR
I rise today to recognize Jeanice Swift, 
Superintendent of the Ann Arbor Public School system in Ann Arbor, MI 
for a decade of tremendous service. Her daily passion and drive to 
improve the educational opportunities for all our areas children is 
worthy of commendation.
. She earned a Bachelors and Masters in Education, as well as 
her Ph.D. in Educational Leadership. Before she arrived in Michigan, 
Dr. Swift spent almost 30 years working her way up the educational 
ladder, beginning as a classroom teacher in Texas before moving to 
Colorado Springs, CO. There, she was Assistant Principal, Principal, 
and Executive Director of her school district before taking the role as 
Assistant Superintendent.
  Since coming on as Superintendent of AAPS in August of 2013, Dr. 
Swift has been a great asset to our students. Her tenure has seen an 
increase in graduation rates, SAT scores, and a substantial reduction 
in suspension rates across the district. Under her leadership, AAPS 
made significant expansions to its preschool and early learning 
programs as well as the adoption of a comprehensive LGBTQ policy.
. In 2017, she was named as a Superintendent to Watch by the 
National School Public Relations Association and in 2018 she was named 
as the Michigan Superintendent of the Year. In 2019, she worked on and 
successfully passed a $1 billion capitol bond for the district, the 
largest the state had seen in almost 30 years. Faced with an 
unprecedented pandemic, Dr. Swift successfully navigated the district 
through two school years of staffing challenges, safety protocols, and 
a transition to remote-virtual schooling.
, I ask my colleagues to join me today in celebrating all 
that Dr. Swift was able to accomplish for the children of Ann Arbor 
over her decade at the helm of AAPS. Her work has set AAPS with a 
stronger base and a promising future. We wish her the best of luck in 
her future endeavors. I thank Dr. Swift.
I rise today to recognize Kerreen Conley 
as she ends her twelve-year tenure as Mayor of the City of Belleville, 
Michigan after serving her local Wayne County community for over three 
decades. Her tremendous dedication to public service while also 
maintaining a full-time career is impressive and worthy of 
commendation.
  Kerreen graduated from Central Michigan University with a Bachelor of 
Science in Business Administration and Management before pursuing 
Masters degrees in Business Administration (MBA) and in Human 
Resources and Organizational Development from Eastern Michigan 
University. She began her decades of public service in 1990, working as 
Controller for the City of Ypsilanti before becoming Belleville City 
Manager in 1995 and Novis Director of Developmental Services in 1998. 
Kerreen was successfully elected to the Belleville City Council in 
2000, and was elected as the Citys Mayor in late 2011. After serving 
three consecutive terms, she decided not to seek re-election and plans 
to dedicate her full attention to Human Resources Consulting when her 
political tenure draws to a close.
  Kerreen can look back on an accomplished mayoral record that truly 
benefitted her community. Chief among her achievements is the 
preservation of essential city services, such as the Belleville 
District Library. The library, which is over a century old and sits in 
the heart of downtown Belleville, recently received some much-needed 
renovations that will ensure it can continue to serve tri-community 
residents for years to come. As mayor, Kerreen also served on the 
bipartisan Board of Directors of the Conference of Western Wayne 
alongside the chief elected officials of seventeen other member 
communities. She has chaired the Conference since January 2020, 
coordinating emergency services and working to alleviate countless 
other needs for an area encompassing 340 square miles and over 700,000 
residents.
  Perhaps most impressively, Kerreen was a dedicated mayor while 
simultaneously juggling various other demanding roles. She has been the 
Chief Executive Officer of RD Advisors, LLC for over a decade and 
served as Redford Townships Human Resources Director from 2014 through 
2016 before assuming a similar role in Canton Township. Two years ago, 
she took on her current title of Senior Manager Human Resources 
Consultant at Rehmann. In addition to her time in local government and 
HR work, Kerreen has made many other significant contributions to our 
local community. She has dedicated herself to various organizations 
over the years, notably serving as an advisory board member at the Boys 
and Girls Club of Southeastern Michigan for seven years and being an 
avid fundraiser for various local non-profits, including the Leukemia 
and Lymphoma Society Kerreens devotion to serving the residents of 
Wayne County and beyond is nothing short of inspirational, and I am 
proud to have such a selfless individual leading our local community.
, I ask my colleagues to join me today in celebrating 
Kerreen Conley for her lifetime of dedication to serving Wayne Countys 
local communities as she wraps up her tenure at the helm of the City of 
Belleville. For the last three decades, Kerreen has worked tirelessly 
to benefit those around her and has made significant contributions to 
preserving and providing invaluable local services. We thank her for 
her tremendous efforts, and wish her all the best as she embarks upon 
her next endeavor.
I rise today to recognize Michael Schoen, 
who recently became the first individual to raise over $1 million for 
cancer research through the Pelotonia bike ride. Pelotonia is a two-day 
event where participants bike hundreds of miles through Central Ohio, 
raising money for cancer research at the Ohio State University 
Comprehensive Cancer Center--the James.

  On December 4, 2023, page E1161, in the second column, the 
following appeared: cancel research at the Ohio State University
  
  The online version has been corrected to read: cancer research 
at the Ohio State University

  Michael has been a staunch supporter of cancer prevention and 
treatment initiatives throughout his entire life, having established 
the Herman Schoen Memorial Cancer Research Endowment Fund in honor of 
his late grandfather and serving on the James Foundation Board at The 
Ohio State University Comprehensive Cancer Center.
  When his mother tragically passed away from small-cell lung cancer, 
Michael turned his grief into action. He rode in his first Pelotonia in 
2010 and promised to ride every year until the battle against cancer is 
won or until he no longer can. Michaels commitment to finding a cure 
for cancer has become an inspiration to his community and to all those 
who know him. This year, Michael became the first individual rider in 
Pelotonia history to raise over $1 million for cancer research, raising 
$115,000 in 2023 alone, and was awarded the 2023 Pelotonia Legacy Award 
for his outstanding leadership.

  On December 4, 2023, page E1161, in the third column, the 
following appeared: When his mother magically passed away from 
small-cell lung cancer, Michael turned his
  
  The online version has been corrected to read: When his mother 
tragically passed away from small-cell lung cancer, Michael turned 
his

  On behalf of Ohios 12th Congressional District, I congratulate 
Michael Schoen on this amazing accomplishment. His incredible 
determination brings us one step closer to a cancer-free world and we 
will continue to support him on his journey in the years to come.
-DOVE. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to celebrate former 
Ambassador and Congresswoman Diane Watsons 90th birthday. 
Congresswoman Watson paved the way for the many Black female 
legislators, myself included, who would come after her. She is a true 
trailblazer, becoming the first Black female member of the Los Angeles 
Unified School District Board and the first Black female California 
State Senator. Today we recognize her remarkable contributions to Los 
Angeles, the State of California, and the United States.
  Born in Los Angeles, CA, Congresswoman Watson attended local Los 
Angeles public schools before earning her Bachelors degree in 
Education from the University of California at Los Angeles (UCLA), her 
Masters degree in School Psychology from California State University 
at Los Angeles (Cal State LA), and her PhD in Educational 
Administration from Claremont Graduate College.
  Congresswoman Watson began her life of public service as an 
elementary school teacher and worked diligently up the ranks to become 
an assistant principal and a school psychologist, touching the lives of 
countless students. She also served as a Health Education Specialist 
for Los Angeles Unified School District (LAUSD), at UCLA, and at Cal 
State LA. In 1975, distinguished members of the Los Angeles community 
encouraged her to seek election to the LAUSD School Board. She won her 
election, and in this role, she worked to expand school integration and 
to raise the rigor of academic standards for all students.
  In 1978, Congresswoman Watson became the first Black woman elected to 
the California State Senate, where she served on the Senate Judiciary 
Committee and as Chair of the Health and Human Services Committee from 
1981 through 1998. At the state level, she championed legislation for 
nutrition assistance programs, breast cancer research, and access to 
health care.
  In 1999, President Clinton appointed Congresswoman Watson as the 
Ambassador to the Federated States of Micronesia, where she helped stop 
illegal toxic waste from being dumped into surrounding waters. After 
her election to the House of Representatives in 2001, she served 
Californias 33rd District faithfully for a decade, representing areas 
of Los Angeles that are now part of the 37th District.
  Congresswoman Watson became a vocal leader on issues related to 
racism and xenophobia, supporting reparations for descendants of 
enslaved Americans, educational system reform, and a comprehensive 
overhaul of the nations criminal justice system. She also called out 
the rise of Islamophobia following the 9/11 attacks. Her tenure as a 
legislator demonstrated a dedication to creating legislation and 
initiatives for the betterment of all.
  Throughout her career, Congresswoman Watson was a trailblazer, 
building a legacy of mentorship, leadership, and strength for others to 
emulate in their own public service careers.
  I am honored to commemorate her impact on communities throughout 
California and the United States. I hope you will join me in wishing 
Congresswoman Diane Watson a very happy birthday.
Title IV of Senate Resolution 4, agreed to by the Senate of February 
4, 1977, calls for establishment of a system for a computerized 
schedule of all meetings and hearings of Senate committees, 
subcommittees, joint committees, and committees of conference. This 
title requires all such committees to notify the Office of the Senate 
Daily Digest--designated by the Rules Committee--of the time, place and 
purpose of the meetings, when scheduled and any cancellations or 
changes in the meetings as they occur.
  As an additional procedure along with the computerization of this 
information, the Office of the Senate Daily Digest will prepare this 
information for printing in the Extensions of Remarks section of the 
Congressional Record on Monday and Wednesday of each week.
  Meetings scheduled for Tuesday, December 5, 2023 may be found in the 
Daily Digest of todays Record.

     9:30 a.m.
       Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs
         To hold an oversight hearing to examine Wall Street 
           firms.
                                                            SH-216
     10 a.m.
       Committee on Environment and Public Works
         To hold hearings to examine Infrastructure Investment and 
           Jobs Act investments in habitat and ecosystem 
           restoration, pollinators, and wildlife crossings.
                                                            SD-406
       Committee on Foreign Relations
         To hold hearings to examine transnational repression, 
           focusing on authoritarians targeting dissenters abroad.
                                                            SD-419
     11 a.m.
       Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
         Business meeting to consider the nominations of Hampton 
           Y. Dellinger, of North Carolina, to be Special Counsel, 
           Office of Special Counsel, and Henry J. Kerner, of 
           Virginia, to be a Member of the Merit Systems 
           Protection Board.
                                                            SD-562
     2 p.m.
       Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe
         To hold hearings to examine sovereign asset confiscation 
           for Ukrainian victory.
                                                            SD-608
     2:30 p.m.
       Committee on Indian Affairs
         To hold an oversight hearing to examine fentanyl in 
           Native communities, focusing on Federal perspectives on 
           the growing crisis.
                                                            SD-628
       Select Committee on Intelligence
         To receive a closed briefing on certain intelligence 
           matters.
                                                            SH-219
     3 p.m.
       Committee on Armed Services
       Subcommittee on Personnel
         To hold hearings to examine the status of Department of 
           Defense recruiting efforts and plans for fiscal year 
           2024.
                                                            SR-222

     10 a.m.
       Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation
         Business meeting to consider the nomination of J. Todd 
           Inman, of Kentucky, to be a Member of the National 
           Transportation Safety Board, and routine lists in the 
           Coast Guard.
                                                            SR-253
       Committee on the Judiciary
         Business meeting to consider the nominations of Sara E. 
           Hill, and John David Russell, both to be a United 
           States District Judge for the Northern District of 
           Oklahoma, and Ramona Villagomez Manglona, to be Judge 
           for the District Court for the Northern Mariana 
           Islands.
                                                            SH-216
     11 a.m.
       Committee on Foreign Relations
         To hold hearings to examine the nomination of Kurt 
           Campbell, of the District of Columbia, to be Deputy 
           Secretary of State, and other pending nominations.
                                                            SD-419

     2:30 p.m.
       Committee on Energy and Natural Resources
       Subcommittee on Public Lands, Forests, and Mining
         To hold hearings to examine S. 1281, to amend the Omnibus 
           Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993 to provide for 
           security of tenure for use of mining claims for 
           ancillary activities, and S. 1742, to modify the 
           requirements applicable to locatable minerals on public 
           domain land.
                                                            SD-366
I rise today to recognize a member of my 
staff, Mike Davin, who will be leaving our office this week.
  Hailing originally from Philadelphia, Mike has dedicated his career 
to public service. Mike has worked on behalf of the people of Ohios 
Fifth District for the past ten years, where he moved up through the 
ranks from Intern to Legislative Director. He has worked tirelessly to 
advance common-sense energy policies, recognize deserving veterans, and 
streamline government regulations.
  Recently, Mike was a critical part in ensuring members of the U.S. 
Armys 720th Military Police Battalion who served our nation in the 
Vietnam War received a Bronze Star for their service. As Legislative 
Director, Mike has instilled a sense of comradery in the office, 
showcasing the positive impact of working together.
  Mike is a loving father and husband, and I know that as he enters 
this next chapter in his career, he will have the love of his family 
supporting him along the way.
  I am eternally grateful for Mikes work on behalf of the District and 
our Nation, and I wish him and his family the best.
THANKING MY 2023 FALL INTERN CLASS FOR THEIR SERVICE TO ILLINOIS 13TH 
                              of illinois
I rise today to express my profound 
gratitude and appreciation for the incredible dedication and hard work 
of the interns who have supported our office during the 2023 fall 
semester. I have been honored to work with Madison Barr, Rochelle 
Williams, Thomas Greco, Jameel Muhammad, and Colin Bellows in my 
Washington office and Cameron Shivley in my Belleville office. Each of 
these special and talented individuals has brought new perspectives and 
an

incredible work ethic to our office. I am inspired by their dedication 
to service and helping the people of Central and Southern Illinois.
  I thank Madison, Rochelle, Thomas, Jameel, Colin, and Cameron for 
their service. I wish them all the best as they continue their 
professional and academic journeys.