I rise today to express my gratitude to 
the Red, Blue and You initiative that celebrates and honors the first 
responders of Gwinnett County, Georgia. The community event, organized 
by local business owners, held its 8th annual celebration on November 
16, 2023. The brave men and women first responders honored at the event 
are the first line of defense for people in distress, and often do not 
receive the recognition and support they deserve. I want to thank these 
dedicated public safety heroes for serving their communities every 
single day. Their work makes a difference and impacts all those in our 
community. God bless each and everyone of them. Semper Fidelis.
CELEBRATING THE 50TH WEDDING ANNIVERSARY OF JIMMY AND HAVA McCLINTOCK
Mr Speaker, I rise today to celebrate 50 years of 
marriage between Jimmy and Hava McClintock of Heath, Texas. They have 
made significant contributions to our community and are longtime 
advocates for the U.S.-Israel alliance.
  Jimmy is a native Texan, while Hava was born in a small town outside 
of Tel Aviv. They first met each other in Israel, where they married in 
1973. For seven years, they lived in Israel. In 1983, Jimmy and Hava 
moved to Rockwall, Texas, before settling in Heath.
  During their many years together, Jimmy and Hava have made it their 
lifes mission to advocate for our shared Judeo-Christian values. Since 
1976, they have organized private and congregational tours to Israel. 
These tours have strengthened the friendship between communities and 
highlighted Israels important struggle for peace and security.
  Furthermore, Jimmy and Hava are board members of their local chapter 
of the Friends of the Israeli Defense Forces (IDF), where they provide 
material support to the IDF and support Israels right to defend 
itself. They also serve on the boards of Gods Grace International and 
Netivyah, where they coordinate humanitarian assistance for Holocaust 
survivors in Israel and those in need. I commend Jimmy and Hava for 
working diligently to aid those facing difficult circumstances so that 
they will not be overlooked.
  I have requested the United States flag to be flown over our Nations 
Capitol in recognition of Jimmy and Hava McClintocks impressive 
milestone. It is truly wonderful to commemorate their five decades of 
happiness and joy, and heres to many more. May God Bless them.
Mr Speaker, I rise today along with my colleague, 
Congressman Mike Thompson, to recognize the enduring work of Ann DuBay 
on the occasion of her retirement from Sonoma Water.
  Ann began her long-standing career in public service in 1981 as a 
seasonal firefighter at the California Department of Forestry. She then 
pursued the California State Fellowship Program and subsequently 
assumed the role of policy consultant at the California State Senates 
Office of Research. Returning to her roots in Sonoma County, Ann became 
the Vice-President and Government Affairs Coordinator at the Santa Rosa 
Chamber of Commerce, before transitioning to a distinguished career in 
journalism as an editorial writer and columnist for nearly a decade at 
the Press Democrat.
  Ann was hired by Sonoma Water in 2008 as Public Information Officer, 
and she became the Community and Government Affairs Manager there in 
2018. In these roles Ann demonstrated an exemplary commitment to the 
community and sustainability at Sonoma Water. Anns good deeds extend 
to the greater region through her work as the administrator for the 
Sonoma Valley Groundwater Sustainability Agency, and Petaluma Valley 
Groundwater Sustainability Agency, while also spearheading outreach and 
communication for all Sonoma County Groundwater Sustainability 
Agencies.
  In addition to her professional commitments, Ann has played a pivotal 
role in several community organizations. She served as Board member for 
the Ceres Community Project. And she is currently on the board of 
directors for the Congregation Shomrei Torah in Santa Rosa, where she 
was president from 2020 to 2022. In addition, she volunteers with 
Riebli-North Firewise Community as well as the California Groundwater 
Coalition where she helps guide water suppliers throughout the state 
meet the water supply needs of California residents.
  Notably, Ann is more than a public servant; she is a mentor and 
inspiration to many. When she and her sister simultaneously faced 
breast cancer, Ann exhibited exemplary strength and determination. Ann 
is also known for her love of reading, biking with her husband Jeremey 
Olsan, and spending time with her son Jake.
, its clear that Ann DuBay has been an extraordinary 
public servant making meaningful contributions to the community through 
both her professional and volunteer work. Therefore, it is fitting that 
we honor her legacy of accomplishments which will benefit Sonoma County 
and the region for years to come.
I rise today to congratulate Chief Warrant 
Officer (CW5) Scott Gronowski on his retirement and to honor him for 
his many years of dedicated service in the defense of our Nation.
  Scott enlisted in the Army as an infantryman in 1989 and undertook 
one of the most remarkable and decorated military careers I have seen. 
While serving as an infantryman, Scott attended Airborne School and 
Ranger School at Fort Benning, Georgia. He eventually went on to serve 
in the 2nd Battalion of the prestigious 75th Ranger Regiment In 1997, 
he completed the Special Forces Qualification Course, earning him the 
coveted Green Beret. Scott went on to become a Warrant Officer in 2002 
and served in numerous leadership and educational roles within the 
Army. His remarkable career culminated with his appointment as the 
Command Chief Warrant Officer for 1st Special Forces Command, where he 
served from April 2021 until June of 2023.
  Throughout his career, Scott deployed on numerous occasions in 
support of U.S. operations in Bosnia-Herzegovina, Kuwait, Iraq, and 
Afghanistan. As a result of his bravery, Scott received many medals and 
distinctions including the Bronze Star, Purple Heart, Air Assault 
Badge, Special Forces Tab, Ranger Tab, among many others.

  All of these accomplishments merely scratch the surface of Scotts 
illustrious military career. CW5 Scott Gronowskis dedication to the 
U.S. Army and the United States is both commendable and inspiring. I 
know I speak for the whole of our community when I wish Scott the very 
best as he begins this next chapter of his life. I thank Scott for his 
courage and sacrifice.
  Mr Speaker, please join me today in congratulating Scott Gronowski on 
his retirement and thanking him for his decades of dedicated service to 
our military and Nation.
I rise today to recognize my constituent 
Frank J. Thornton for his 28 years of service on the Henrico County 
Board of Supervisors representing the Fairfield Magisterial District. 
Frank is a history maker, becoming the first African American elected 
to the Henrico Board of Supervisors in 1995 representing the Fairfield 
Magisterial District. He was elected as the Boards chairman for the 
sixth time in January 2023 and will complete his tenure with his 
retirement at the end of this year.
  A native of Richmond, Mr. Thornton co-founded and served as president 
of the Henrico Civic League. His academic accomplishments include a 
bachelors degree from Virginia Union University and a masters degree 
from American University. Mr. Thornton retired in 2014 after a 
distinguished 40-year career as a professor of French at Virginia 
Union, where he earned accolades such as the Teacher of the Year award. 
, community members, 
and our Commonwealth.
  In 1987, Mr. Thornton initially sought election to represent the 
Fairfield District, and though unsuccessful, he played a pivotal role 
in a successful federal lawsuit alongside the Henrico Civic League and 
the American Civil Liberties Union. This lawsuit challenged and 
overturned Henricos magisterial district lines, with the court ruling 
against county officials who had ensured that Black residents were the 
minority in every district.
  As Henrico County Supervisor, Mr. Thornton demonstrated unwavering 
commitment to the residents of the Fairfield District. Under his 
leadership, initiatives were implemented to expand the Greater Richmond 
Transportation Company (GRTC) bus service to Short Pump, construct 
several libraries and recreation centers in the county, and expand 
access to public health services.
  Beyond his local responsibilities, Mr. Thornton extended his public 
service to various organizations, including the Richmond Regional 
Transportation Planning Organization, the Capital Region Collaborative 
Organizing Council, and the Maymont Foundation Board of Directors, 
among others.
  Virginias Fourth Congressional District has been privileged to 
benefit from the passionate and devoted advocacy of Mr. Thornton for 
civil rights and social change. Mr. Speaker, I commend Mr. Thornton for 
his outstanding leadership and extend my best wishes for a fulfilling 
retirement from the Henrico County Board of Supervisors. His legacy, 
marked by tireless dedication, will undoubtedly endure.
Mr Speaker, today I pay tribute to a remarkable woman 
who dedicated her professional career to making the state of Michigan, 
its government, its institutions, and its character stronger and 
better. Kathy Wilbur was a fierce advocate and a devoted public servant 
in both government and higher education, and brought her two passions 
together in the role she held for the past five years at her alma 
mater, Michigan State University. I was fortunate enough to call her my 
friend, and as her sudden passing leaves a deep hole of grief for so 
many, it is fitting that we pause to reflect on all she gave to our 
state.
  Kathy began her career in the Michigan Legislature, where she served 
as chief of staff to former Senator Bill Sederburg. From the start, she 
was known for her prowess in communications and policy issues, and she 
went on to serve in the administration of former Michigan Governor John 
Engler, heading up three different departments during her tenure--the 
only woman in Michigan history to do so. In the early 2000s, she began 
the next chapter of her career with our states public universities, 
first at Central Michigan University where she served as interim 
president, vice president of advancement and external relations, and 
vice president for government relations.

  But of the many titles Kathy held over her decades-long career, one 
the closest to her heart was Spartan. Kathy was a super-alumna, holding 
not one, not two, but three degrees from MSU: a bachelors degree in 
Journalism, a masters degree in higher education administration, and a 
Ph.D in the same, and even served one term on the universitys Board of 
Trustees. In 2018, she joined Michigan State Universitys staff, where 
she served as senior vice president for government relations. Under her 
tenure, the university secured funding and support for landmark 
projects, including the Engineering and Digital Innovation Center, the 
MSU greenhouses, and the MSU Apple Academy. Her steady hand helped 
guide the university through good times and bad, driven by an 
unshakable faith in the power of higher education, clothed in green and 
white.
  Over the years, Kathy was a mentor to so many, and I personally 
benefited from her knowledge and her wisdom. Her door was always open, 
her invitation to coffee sincere, her cup of kindness bottomless. She 
graciously shared her experience with all, and was truly invested in 
seeing others succeed. From Kathy, I learned what it means to advocate, 
and the power of active listening. Her life was a testament to the 
power of getting things done, and the role one person can play to make 
positive change. I send my deepest condolences to all who knew and 
loved Kathy, particularly her husband, Tom, their four sons, Tom, Will, 
Sam, and Ray; her granddaughter, Mary; and the entire Michigan State 
University family. Kathy Wilburs accomplishments, her passion, and her 
compassion will live on in our hearts and on the banks of the Red Cedar 
in East Lansing.
I rise today to honor and remember 
Claude Morse, who sadly passed away November 12, 2023. Tennessee has 
long been known as The Volunteer State for a reason, and no one I have 
met personified the spirit of that motto more than Claude Morse.

  On December 6, 2023, page E1184, in the third column, the 
following appeared: Mr. SCOTT DesJARLAIS. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to honor and remember Claude Morse, who sadly passed away 
November 12,
  
  The online version has been corrected to read: Mr. DesJARLAIS. 
, I rise today to honor and remember Claude Morse, who 
sadly passed away November 12,

  Claude was a selfless example of volunteerism, and not the kind of 
symbolic of volunteerism that simply amounts to adding his name to a 
group. When a need and a project arose, Claude was never just a worker; 
he was a planner, an organizer, a manager, and a participant.
  Morse was actively involved with several nonprofit organizations 
throughout Coffee County. Honor Flight, Project Appleseed and the 
Arnold Community Council are just a few of the organizations to which 
Morse devoted his time and efforts.
  As President of Honor Flight Middle Tennessee, Claude worked 
tirelessly to take eligible World War II, Korean War and Vietnam 
veterans on a free trip to see war memorials in Washington, DC. It 
remains my great honor to personally welcome as many of these heroes as 
I can when they come, and it was always a special treat to get to spend 
time with Claude as well.
  Over the past several years, Claude has sponsored hundreds of hero 
veterans and hundreds of hours of work to see it accomplished. Yet to 
him, it was simply time well spent to recognize those who deserved it.
  In addition, Claude also was a long-time member and President of the 
Arnold Community Council, a group that promotes, protects,

and preserves the Arnold Engineering Development Complex (AEDC) in 
Tullahoma, Tennessee and to facilitate interaction and cooperation 
between the complex and surrounding communities. Claude and many of his 
colleagues would spend time every year visiting the Tennessee 
Congressional delegation, other key members of Congress, members of the 
Tennessee General Assembly, and officials with the Department of 
Defense to advocate for and advance the mission of the facility. His 
group would also sponsor awards for AEDC personnel, the annual AEDC 
veterans picnic, the ACC job fair, the Honor Flights and the AEDC 
childrens Christmas party.
  Claude was also a committee member for Wreaths Across America, an 
organization that places wreaths on fallen veterans graves during 
Christmas.
  He was also a natural candidate for public service and was selected 
as a Commissioner for the Coffee County Government. He was a recipient 
of the Governors Volunteer Star Award for all his efforts and selected 
as an AEDC lifetime achievement fellow.
  I am proud to represent a community that has the utmost respect for 
all the men and women who have served our country with valor and honor 
as members of our armed forces. Claude never took a day off in making 
sure that we always prioritized that commitment to all of those who 
have served, are serving, and will serve. I will miss Claude and his 
hard work, and most importantly, his friendship and support. I ask all 
Members of Congress to join me in paying respect to Claude Morris for a 
lifetime of service to country and community, and I ask this 
institution to join me in sending the deepest sympathies to all his 
family and friends.
today, I rise to honor the life and legacy 
of Bessie Rodriguez of Dallas. Bessie was a loving mother who used a 
tragic experience to effect meaningful change in the name of Justice 
here in North Texas.
  On July 24, 1973, Bessies life changed forever, when her 12-year-old 
son, Santos, was fatally shot by Dallas law enforcement. Santos meant 
everything to Bessie. However, she turned tragedy into action. She used 
the death of her son to start a movement to boost accountability and 
transparency in the police and community relations here that is still 
being felt in North Texas today. Just this year, Dallas commemorated 
the 50th anniversary of Santos murder by holding multiple events to 
push for justice. The commemoration of this solemn anniversary would 
not have been possible without Bessies work.
  I once again rise today to commemorate Bessies legacy. I am praying 
for her extended family during this time.
I rise today to mourn the 
loss and honor the legacy of a World War II heroine from Lakeland, FL, 
Lt. Hope Kirkendall. She passed away at the age of 103, carrying her 
spiritedness, heart of service and witty sense of humor until her final 
days.
  During World War II, Lt. Kirkendall was a nurse in the U.S. Army and 
was one of the first women to land in Normandy shortly after the Allied 
Forces D-Day invasion. She arrived one month after the initial 
invasion and achieved the rank of first lieutenant, working around the 
clock with her surgical team to care for soldiers who made the ultimate 
sacrifices in the Battle for Brest and the Battle of the Bulge.
  Decades after her service, Lt. Kirkendall recounted getting involved 
in military life because she was young and wanted to see everything. 
She certainly achieved that goal Among her adventures, Kirkendall 
traveled in an ambulance convoy, using a gas can for a seat. She moved 
with field hospitals, taking in the wounded near the front lines. And 
amongst the chaos and the tragedy, she said she found a home.
  In 2017, Lt. Kirkendall received the French Knight in the Legion of 
Honor award for her expertise and bravery during bombings and in the 
line of fire. Lt. Kirkendall went on to raise five children after the 
war and continued her duties off the battlefield caring for patients 
who needed psychiatric assessments. She is survived by two siblings, 
five children, nine grandchildren and four great-grandchildren.
  Sadly, we are losing more of the greatest generation each day. May 
Hope rest in peace. She is truly an American hero.
I rise today to recognize Koi Annino for 
earning the Arvada Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth Award.
  Koi has achieved great things, all while overcoming adversity and 
challenges along the way. Students like Koi, who strive to make the 
most of their education, develop crucial skills and a work ethic that 
will guide them for the rest of their lives. This award is a testament 
to Kois hard work, determination, and perseverance at Oberon Middle 
School and is clearly just the beginning of a bright and promising 
future.
  It is my honor to congratulate Koi Annino on achieving the Arvada 
Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth award.
on Tuesday, December 5, 2023, I missed 
votes due to testing positive for COVID-19. Had I been present, I would 
have voted on NAY on Roll Call No. 692; NAY on Roll Call No. 693; YEA 
on Roll Call No. 694; YEA on Roll Call No. 695; YEA on Roll Call No. 
696; and PRES on Roll Call No. 697.

  On December 6, 2023, page E1186, in the second column, the 
following appeared: Ms. LOFGREN. Mr. Speaker, on Tuesday, December 
5, 2023, I missed votes due to testing positive for COVID-19. Had 
I been present, I would have voted on NAY on Roll Call No. 692; 
NAY on Roll Call No. 693; YEA on Roll Call No. 694; YEA on Roll 
Call No. 695; and PRES on Roll Call No. 697.
  
  The online version has been corrected to read: Ms. LOFGREN. Mr. 
Speaker, on Tuesday, December 5, 2023, I missed votes due to 
testing positive for COVID-19. Had I been present, I would have 
voted on NAY on Roll Call No. 692; NAY on Roll Call No. 693; YEA 
on Roll Call No. 694; YEA on Roll Call No. 695; YEA on Roll Call 
No. 696; and PRES on Roll Call No. 697.
I rise today to recognize an 
outstanding constituent from my district, Lanae Angel Lynn Carrington. 
a sense to better her community and has 
always demonstrated her ability to overcome complex challenges and 
situations.
  Lanae was born in Baltimore, Maryland and moved to Pennsylvania with 
her mother and siblings in 2013. An AAU Student Athlete of the Year, 
Lanae was also named Suburban One Female Athlete of the Week and SOL 
Student Athlete of the Week. Lanae has consistently made All Team for 
Track and Field each year of her high school career while 
simultaneously maintaining a 4.0 GPA.
  Lanae will be continuing with Track and Field at the collegiate level 
and has been fortunate enough to be awarded with the opportunity to 
attend Lehigh University where she will be competing at the Division 
One level.
  We are all incredibly proud for the positive impact Lanae has on our 
community and wish her the best of luck in her bright future ahead.
I rise today to honor the life of William 
``Billy Cooke, who passed away peacefully in his home in 
Tappahannock, Virginia on November 26, 2023.
  Billy was born in Tappahannock, and attended Tappahannock High 
School, where he played centerfield on the baseball team. He served two 
years in the U.S. Army before returning to baseball at Randolph-Macon 
College. He earned a bachelors degree in economics in 1959 before 
returning to Essex County, where he became a prominent member of his 
community. Throughout more than 30 years, he served as a deacon, clerk, 
and Adult Sunday School teacher at Howards Baptist Church, helped 
found the Tappahannock Little League, and served four terms on the 
Essex County Board of Supervisors, among countless other achievements.
  Billy was a kind and easygoing man who enjoyed watching PGA 
tournaments and Atlanta Braves games with his family. He was often 
found in his office at the Essex Concrete Main Office, where he worked, 
or at the Hobbs Hole Golf Course. He never missed an opportunity to 
catch up with family and friends, or to dance with his wife whenever 
they found an open floor with music.
  Billy is preceded in death by his brother, Frank and dear friends 
Willie Cleaton. Alec Dillard, and James Moore He is survived by his 
loving wife of 66 years, Betty Cooke; his brother, Gene Cooke; his 
sons, William Cooke and Stephen Cooke; several nieces and nephews, and 
his devoted caregivers from Riverside Hospice
, I ask that you rise with me in honoring the life of 
Billy Cooke and his service to the people of Essex County.
Title IV of Senate Resolution 4, agreed to by the Senate of February 
4, 1977, calls for establishment of a system for a computerized 
schedule of all meetings and hearings of Senate committees, 
subcommittees, joint committees, and committees of conference. This 
title requires all such committees to notify the Office of the Senate 
Daily Digest--designated by the Rules Committee--of the time, place and 
purpose of the meetings, when scheduled and any cancellations or 
changes in the meetings as they occur.
  As an additional procedure along with the computerization of this 
information, the Office of the Senate Daily Digest will prepare this 
information for printing in the Extensions of Remarks section of the 
Congressional Record on Monday and Wednesday of each week.
  Meetings scheduled for Thursday, December 7, 2023 may be found in the 
Daily Digest of todays Record.

     10 a.m.
       Committee on Appropriations
       Subcommittee on Transportation, Housing and Urban 
           Development, and Related Agencies
         To hold hearings to examine communities in crisis, 
           focusing on what happens when disaster recovery funds 
           are delayed.
                                                            SD-192
       Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions
         Business meeting to consider S. 1840, to amend the Public 
           Health Service Act to reauthorize and improve the 
           National Breast and Cervical Cancer Early Detection 
           Program for fiscal years 2024 through 2028, S. 3392, to 
           reauthorize the Education Sciences Reform Act of 2002, 
           the Educational Technical Assistance Act of 2002, and 
           the National Assessment of Educational Progress 
           Authorization Act, S. 3393, to reauthorize the SUPPORT 
           for Patients and Communities Act, S. 644, to expand the 
           take-home prescribing of methadone through pharmacies, 
           and other pending calendar business.
                                                            SD-430
       Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
       Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations
         To hold hearings to examine Coast Guard Academy 
           whistleblowers, focusing on stories of sexual assault 
           and harassment.
                                                            SD-562
       Committee on the Judiciary
         To hold hearings to examine cleaning up the C-Suite, 
           focusing on ensuring accountability for corporate 
           criminals.
                                                            SH-216
     2:30 p.m.
       Committee on Energy and Natural Resources
       Subcommittee on Public Lands, Forests, and Mining
         To hold hearings to examine S. 1281, to amend the Omnibus 
           Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993 to provide for 
           security of tenure for use of mining claims for 
           ancillary activities, and S. 1742, to modify the 
           requirements applicable to locatable minerals on public 
           domain land.
                                                            SD-366
       Committee on Foreign Relations
         To receive a closed briefing on Iran and its proxy threat 
           to U.S. policy and personnel post-October 7.
                                                           SVC-217
       Select Committee on Intelligence
         To receive a closed briefing on certain intelligence 
           matters.
                                                            SH-219
     3 p.m.
       Committee on Rules and Administration
         To hold an oversight hearing to examine the Government 
           Publishing Office.
                                                            SR-301
                              DECEMBER 13
     10 a.m.
       Committee on the Judiciary
         To hold hearings to examine pending nominations.
                                                            SD-226
     2:30 p.m.
       Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation
       Subcommittee on Space and Science
         To hold hearings to examine government promotion of 
           safety and innovation in the new space economy.
                                                            SR-253
       Select Committee on Intelligence
         To receive a closed briefing on certain intelligence 
           matters.
                                                            SH-219
     3 p.m.
       Committee on the Judiciary
       Subcommittee on Competition Policy, Antitrust, and Consumer 
           Rights
         To hold hearings to examine the impact of algorithms on 
           competition and consumer rights.
                                                            SD-226