I rise today to recognize our Texas-24 
Hometown Hero, Maddy Sexton of Southlake Carroll. Earlier this year, 
Maddy was in a car heading to school with a friend when her friend 
began to experience a medical emergency. Maddy demonstrated maturity 
beyond her years and handled the situation perfectly--she immediately 
pulled over, called Southlake Fire, and helped take care of her friend 
before Southlake Fire quickly arrived.
  I thank Maddy for going above and beyond to look out for her friend 
through her vigilance, quick thinking, and maturity. It is an honor to 
join Southlake DPS in recognizing Maddy for her contributions to our 
community.
I rise today to recognize our Texas-24 
Hometown Hero, Oliver Burke. Oliver, a rising junior at Greenhill 
School, recently led his fellow Boy Scouts in a wildflower seed 
building service project to help preserve the endangered Backland 
Prairie. He brought together 50 of his fellow Scouts from rural and 
urban communities across North Texas--most of whom did not previously 
know each other--and they made more than 3,800 native wildflower seed 
balls.
  In addition to his leadership in the Boy Scouts, Oliver spent the 
last year serving on my Congressional Youth Advisory Council and 
recently participated in our annual Congressional Art Competition. I 
thank Oliver for his dedication to service, bringing people together, 
and bettering our North Texas community for generations to come.
I rise today to recognize our Texas-24 
Hometown Hero, Anne Pottinger, who is highly involved in our North 
Texas community and always finds a way to help others. She is a leader 
in numerous non-profit organizations, including the Freedom Mobility 
Foundation in Southlake and Holidays &amp; Heroes in Fort Worth. Through 
her work with the Freedom Mobility Foundation, Anne helps to provide 
mobility equipment like track chairs to those in need.
  I want to thank Anne for going above and beyond for our North Texas 
veterans and military families.
I rise today to recognize our TX-24 
Hometown Hero, retired police chief Jimmy Perdue. Chief Perdue spent 
over 40 years in public service, 18 of them serving as the North 
Richland Hills Chief of Police and Director of Public Safety. Under his 
leadership, the North Richland Hills Police Department earned 
``Recognized Status from the Texas Police Chiefs Association 
Foundation Best Practices Recognition Program in 2011, a status which 
the department continues to maintain year after year. He also served as 
a past President of the North Texas Police Chiefs Association and as 
the President of the Texas Police Chiefs Association from 2022-2023.
  Chief Perdue continually displayed his dedication to public service 
by developing the Women of Law Enforcement Conference, leading the 
citys response to the COVID-19 outbreak, overseeing the design and 
construction of the North Richland Hills Animal Adoption and Rescue 
Center, and bringing the SHIELD program to life, a 3-day training 
course for NRH police officers. I commend Chief Perdue for going above 
and beyond for our community and congratulate him on his retirement. He 
will be missed.
I rise to celebrate the life of my dear 
friend Janet Amend Carver, a dedicated public servant who passed away 
on July 23, 2023, at the age of 90.
  Born January 7, 1933 near San Jose, California, Janet graduated from 
high school in 1949 from Immaculate Heart High School in Hollywood. In 
1954, she graduated from the University of Redlands with a Bachelor of 
Arts degree in Far East history. While at Redlands, she was the editor 
of the college newspaper and a stringer for the Los Angeles Times. 
Janet then pursued graduate studies at the University of Oslo on a 
scholarship from the Storting (Norwegian Parliament).
  Janet moved to Washington, D.C., where she joined the U.S. Foreign 
Service in 1955 and in 1957 joined the staff of Senator Thomas H. 
Kuchel (CA). Later, she served as the district manager for most of 
Northern Virginia for the 1980 Census and ended her working career as a 
staff member for Mount Vernon Supervisor Gerry Hyland.
  In 1963, Janet embarked on an admirable career as a volunteer with 
many different Virginia Democratic Party organizations. Her tireless 
efforts earned her widespread recognition. Janet joined the Fairfax 
County Democratic Committee in 1965, campaigning for progressive 
candidates in opposition to the then ruling Byrd Machine. She held 
numerous positions over the years, including member of the Virginia 
Democratic State Central Committee; First Vice Chair of the 8th 
Congressional District Democratic Committee (CDDC); First Vice Chair of 
the 11th CDDC; and 3-time chair of the Springfield Democratic 
Committee. In 2002, she received the 8th CDDCs Eagle Award for 
outstanding lifetime achievements in civil rights and public service. 
In 2008, she was elected to represent Virginias 11th Congressional 
District in the Electoral College where she cast her vote for then-
candidate for President Barack Obama.
  Beyond her professional achievements, Janet was an avid traveler, 
camper, and bird watcher. She visited all 50 states, Canada, Mexico, 
and many countries in Europe, Africa, and South America.
  Janet instilled in her children their civic duty and sacred right to 
vote in every election. Her kindness and lively spirit touched the 
lives of many, leaving a mark on those who knew her.
  Janet leaves behind her beloved husband of 65 years, John; her 
cherished children and their spouses, Wendy, Ted (Mary), and Andy 
(Terri); her treasured grandchildren, Elisabeth, Derek, and Annemarie; 
her dear sister and brother-in-law, Carole and Ernie Labastida; nieces 
and nephews, cousins, and friends.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in honoring the life and 
legacy of Janet Amend Carver. Her leadership and commitment to public 
service was inspirational, and she will be missed by all who knew her.
it is my honor to recognize Tom Bensley for 
his 14 years of service as Sheriff of Grand Traverse County. Throughout 
his time working for the people of Northern Michigan, including nearly 
five decades in law enforcement, Tom has shown considerable poise and 
professionalism while making his community a safer place.
  Following 3 years of service in the United States Army, Sheriff 
Bensley attended Northwestern Michigan College. In 1971, he joined the 
Grand Traverse County Sheriffs Office as a seasonal marine officer. By 
1974, Tom was promoted to a full-time road patrol officer. In the 
spring of 1983, he was named supervisor of the departments marine 
safety section. He received numerous awards for his service including 
the 1985 Employee of the Year and two Awards of Merit. Tom temporarily 
retired in 1999, before being elected as the 34th Sheriff of Grand 
Traverse County in 2008. He would go on to hold this position for 14 
years, until announcing his upcoming retirement in September of 2023. 
Additionally, he was an active member of the Sheriffs Office dive team 
for 35 years.
  Throughout his distinguished career, Sheriff Bensley prioritized his 
communitys safety and well-being above all else. Toms longtime 
devotion to our country is commendable, and the

impact of his work on his fellow officers and the people of the Grand 
Traverse County cannot be overstated. We owe Tom our utmost gratitude 
for his continued effort to better himself, his colleagues, and the 
community he has served for the past 50 years.
, it is my honor to recognize Tom Bensley for his decades 
of combined service to the United States Army and the Grand Traverse 
County Sheriffs Department. On behalf of Michigans First District, I 
extend my gratitude to Tom and his family and wish them the best in 
their future endeavors.
today, I rise to introduce the District of 
Columbia Electronic Transmittal of Legislation Act, which would permit 
the Chair of the Council of the District of Columbia to transmit 
legislation to Congress in the form of the Chairs choosing, including 
electronic form. This bill would bring the congressional review process 
for legislation enacted by D.C. into the electronic age. Last Congress, 
the Committee on Oversight and Reform passed this bill.
  While I do not believe there should be a congressional review process 
for D.C. legislation--and I have introduced a bill to eliminate the 
review process--this bill would not change the review process, except 
that it would give D.C. flexibility in the form it transmits 
legislation to Congress. This bills only purpose is to reduce 
administrative burdens on D.C. and Congress.
  The D.C. Home Rule Act requires the Chair of the D.C. Council to 
transmit legislation to

Congress for a review period. The legislation takes effect upon the 
expiration of the review period, unless a resolution of disapproval is 
enacted into law during the review period. The Home Rule Act is silent 
on the form of transmittal, but Congress has always required the 
legislation to be physically transmitted.
  Electronic records are recognized as valid under Federal and State 
law, and Federal, State and local governments conduct official business 
electronically. For example, under the Electronic Signatures in Global 
and National Commerce Act, which was enacted into law more than 20 
years ago, with respect to any interstate transaction in which the 
parties consent, ``a signature, contract, or other record relating to 
such transaction may not be denied legal effect, validity, or 
enforceability solely because it is in electronic form. In 2002, the 
E-Government Act, which facilitated the Federal Government providing 
information and services to the public electronically, was enacted into 
law.
  Federal agencies transmit regulations and other documents to the 
Federal Register electronically. Congress is also capable of conducting 
official business electronically. For example, the House permits 
Members, including acting through their staff, to introduce legislation 
and submit statements into the Congressional Record electronically.
  The requirement that D.C. physically transmit legislation imposes 
costs on the Council. The Council engages in a 12-step process to 
physically transmit legislation, including printing two copies of each 
bill and committee report, arranging a time for delivery of these 
documents to the offices of the Speaker and President of the Senate and 
having two staffers drive to the Capitol to deliver the documents--two 
are necessary because of parking restrictions.
  The physical transmittal process also imposes costs on Congress. The 
following congressional offices and committees are involved in the 
physical transmittal process: the offices of the Speaker and President 
of the Senate, the House and Senate parliamentarians, the House Clerk, 
the Senate Secretary, the House Committee on Oversight and 
Accountability and the Senate Committee on Homeland Security and 
Governmental Affairs.
  The aftermath of the January 6, 2021, attack on the Capitol 
highlighted the burdens of physical transmittal. After temporary 
fencing was installed around the Capitol, D.C. employees could not 
enter the Capitol. This delayed transmittal of D.C. legislation until 
Council and congressional staff developed a workaround, which consisted 
of staff meeting outside the fencing to transmit legislation.
  I recognize that Congress requires all so-called executive 
communications, including D.C. legislation, to be physically 
transmitted, but D.C. is the only entity required to transmit 
legislation to Congress for a review period.
  I urge my colleagues to support this bill.
I rise to recognize the Adam 
Holliday Chapter of the Daughters of the American Revolution, and thank 
them for their work to preserve our Nations heritage, while educating 
our next generation on the importance of upholding our constitutional 
values.
  As Constitution Day approaches, we remember the words of Benjamin 
Franklin who was asked by a group of citizens as he exited the 
Constitutional Convention what type of government had been created.
  He replied: ``A republic, if you can keep it.
  Each day we strive to uphold the Republic that was created that day 
in Philadelphia.
  Both in the halls of Congress, and across the country we must remain 
committed to protecting our constitutional rights that have helped us 
to become the most prosperous Nation the world has ever known.
  As we celebrate Constitution Day, we remember our founding fathers 
and strive to uphold their legacy.
it is my honor to recognize Howard Seid for 
his numerous efforts to better the lives of veterans across Ontonagon 
County and the Upper Peninsula of Michigan. Through his bountiful 
service, charitable nature, and continued leadership, Howard has become 
irreplaceable to the people of the great State of Michigan.
  None are more deserving of recognition, as Howard has gone above and 
beyond in his commitment to the local communities of Northern Michigan. 
Prior to his work with veterans, Howard served in the United States Air 
Force, where he held the roles of Trainer Pilot, Airlift Pilot, and 
Wing Commander. After 27 years, he retired at the rank of Colonel. His 
devotion to the people of his country and fellow servicemen remains 
steadfast.
  It is difficult to fully encapsulate all the ways in which Howard 
works to better the lives of veterans. Since 1992, he has been an 
active member of The American Legion Post 92. In 2017, he became the 
chapters Commander and continues to hold that position today. Under 
his leadership, the post has become a profitable and active community 
center with many veterans attending weekly events. Similarly, he has 
served both as the Western U.P. representative on the U.P. Veterans 
Community Action Team and as Vice-Chairman of their Steering Committee 
for the past 6 years. Furthermore, Howard has been instrumental in 
ensuring that veterans in the U.P. have access to sufficient medical 
facilities and treatments. As a volunteer for Disabled American 
Veterans, he has logged over 10,000 hours transporting individuals to 
doctor appointments and hospital visits. Additionally, he works to 
honor veterans across the Upper Peninsula, organizing events like an 
annual veteran fishing day on a private and handicap-accessible pond. 
Since retiring from the Air Force, Howard has spent years serving 
veterans, and his efforts have provided a much-needed support for our 
military heroes.
  Outside of his work for veterans, Howard is an active and charitable 
community member. He has been responsible for planning and executing 
Rockland communitys annual Christmas gathering for the last 7 years. 
Amidst the COVID-19 pandemic, he ensured that every child received a 
hand-delivered gift from Santa traveling atop a firetruck. In addition, 
he serves as a member of the Ottawa Lions Club, St. Paul Methodist 
Church, U.P. Sport Fishing Association, and Rockland Volunteer Fire 
Department. As a Colonel, a veteran, a volunteer, and a Yooper, Howard 
has consistently put the needs of others before his own.
, It is my honor to congratulate Howard Seid for his 
decades of service to fellow Michigan veterans. Michiganders can take 
great pride in knowing the First District is home to such a selfless 
and devoted individual. On behalf of my constituents, I wish Howard all 
the best in his future endeavors.
it is my honor to recognize James Provost 
for being named the 2023 Upper Peninsula Veteran of the Year. Through 
his continued service, charitable nature, and strong leadership, James 
has become an essential part of the Upper Peninsula of Michigan.
  The U.P. Veteran of the Year is chosen annually by a selection 
committee consisting of past commanders of various service 
organizations throughout the peninsula. It is given to recognize Yooper 
veterans who go above and beyond in their service to their local 
communities and fellow veterans. None are more deserving of this honor 
than James. Prior to his work with veterans, James served in the United 
States Marine Corps, where he was decorated with the Good Conduct 
Medal, National Defense Service Medal, Vietnamese Service Medal, 
Vietnamese Campaign Medal, and two Republic of Vietnam Meritorious Unit 
Citations. His devotion to the people of his country and community has 
not wavered since returning from military service.
  It is impossible to fully list all the ways in which James works to 
better the lives of U.P. veterans. Since the organizations founding in 
2014, he has been the Chairman of the Marquette County Veterans 
Alliance. Similarly, he has served on the Marquette Countys Veterans 
Affairs Committee for the past 9 years. As a member of the committee, 
he works on the veterans crisis team, finding resources and housing for 
individuals in need. Furthermore, James has played a pivotal role in 
ensuring that veterans in the U.P. have consistent access to medical 
services. Through his fundraising efforts, he has helped the Disabled 
American Veterans Chapter 22 Veteran Transportation Program to purchase 
new vehicles and has personally logged thousands of hours transporting 
veterans to doctor appointments and hospital visits. Notably, in 2016 
James was responsible for the AVTT Traveling Vietnam Walls arrival in 
Marquette. He organized many commemorative veterans events to coincide 
with the tribute. Since returning from the Vietnam War, James has spent 
years as an advocate for veterans, and the initiatives that he has 
begun have created the infrastructure of support that our military 
heroes need and deserve.
  Outside of his work for veterans, James is an active community 
member. After providing the loan to start the Marquette County Youth 
Football League in 1990, he became the league commissioner for the 
following 20 years. In addition, he coached Marquette Junior Hockey for 
12 years, serving twice as Vice President. Later, he founded the 
Central Upper Peninsula Hockey League and served as both Marquette 
Senior High School and Northern Michigan Universitys Goal Judge for 
over two decades. His contributions to his community have been 
previously recognized by Senator Peters, Senator Stabenow, Governor 
Whitmer, and myself. Just last year, he was also honored as the 2022 
Marquette County Veteran of the Year. As a servicemember, a veteran, a 
volunteer, and a Yooper, James has consistently put the needs of others 
before his own.
, it is my honor to congratulate James A. Provost for his 
decades of service to fellow Michigan veterans and for being named the 
2023 Upper Peninsula Veteran of the Year. Michiganders can take great 
pride in knowing the First District is home to such a selfless and 
devoted individual. On behalf of my constituents, I wish James all the 
best in his future endeavors.
I rise to recognize the city of 
Monessen, Pennsylvania, in celebration of its 125th anniversary.
  Prior to its founding, the area consisted of 8 farms. However, Civil 
War veteran James M. Schoonmaker and other great Americans, saw the 
promise of an industrial city on the Monongahela River. Thus, 
Schoonmaker convinced famed industrialist William Donner to set up a 
tin plate mill within the new community. Thanks to the American Tin 
Plate Companys success, the community grew rapidly, and the borough of 
Monessen became incorporated on September 3, 1898.
  Throughout the early 20th century, Monessens community played active 
roles in the suffrage and labor movements, events surrounding 
Prohibition, and in the industrial efforts powering American operations 
in World War I and World War II. In 1921, the city also had a multitude 
of nationalities and mirrored the ethnicities of the Pittsburgh region, 
serving as a microcosm of America as a whole. At its peak, the citys 
population reached over 20,000 residents. Today, the town is still an 
important part of the southwestern Pennsylvania community. Its 
residents exemplify the values of hard work, dedication to ones 
community, and good citizenship.
, on behalf of the people of Pennsylvanias 14th 
Congressional District, I congratulate the City of Monessen on its 
125th anniversary and applaud their determination to build a better 
community for themselves and their children. I am confident that 
Monessens people will strive for and achieve an even more successful 
next 125 years.
I rise to recognize the 2023 graduating 
class of Fairfax County High School Firefighter program. In 2016, the 
Fairfax County Fire and Rescue Department in partnership with Fairfax 
County Public Schools created its High School Firefighter Program to 
provide training to students who are considering a career as a 
firefighter.
  Students who participate in this program attend courses taught by 
qualified instructors at the Fairfax County Fire Academy. In fact, they 
receive the same training as new professional and volunteer 
firefighters. The course is grueling but upon successful completion, 
the students will earn a Virginia Certification as Firefighter I &amp; II 
and Hazardous Materials Awareness and Operations. Should these students 
decide to apply to the Fairfax County Fire Academy, this program will 
make them competitive candidates and will have prepared them for 
recruit school.
  Fourteen seniors and one junior are graduating as the Class of 2023 
of the High

School Firefighter Program. It is my great honor to include in the 
Record the names of the following graduates:
  Sydney G. Bates; Braden A. Dasher; Callie J. Desrosier; Alec T. 
DiLeonardo; Ian S. Dingman; Regan N. Kelley; Peter D. Mangone; Connor 
J. Marshall; Casey W. Martin; Hunter J. Piotrowski; Eric S. Verrier.
, the Fairfax County Fire &amp; Rescue Department is 1 of the 
best fire departments in the country and in the world. I commend the 
department as well as the public school system for partnering in the 
creation of this program. I also applaud these young people for their 
desire to learn more about the department and for their interest in 
protecting our community. Northern Virginia is fortunate to have such 
dedicated young citizens. I ask my colleagues to join me in 
congratulating these students on their successful completion of their 
program and in wishing them great success in their future endeavors.
I rise today to recognize the 
life of Mr. Harvey Doleman, Sr. Mr. Harvey Doleman, Sr. is a native of 
Anniston, AL. He received his grammar school education at Central 
Girard Elementary School, Phenix City, AL, and graduated from South 
Girard High School in 1953. He attended Chattahoochee Valley Community 
College.
  Upon graduating from high school, Mr. Doleman joined the United 
States Army. Mr. Doleman was assigned to U.S. Army Chemical Corps, 
Senior Instructor Chemical School, at Ft. McClellan, AL, where he 
specialized in chemical warfare. He also had overseas assignments 
during his service including Korea 1956-1957, Germany 1963-1966, Korea 
1967-1968 and Vietnam 1970-1971. His final duty assignment and major 
command was HHC, US Army School/Training Center, TRADOC.
  He received recognition for his service including National Defense 
Service Medal with Oak Leaf Cluster, Good Conduct Medal (Fourth Award), 
Armed Forces Expeditionary Medal (Korea), Vietnam Service Medal, 
Vietnam Campaign Medal with Device, 2 Oversea Bars, Bronze Star Medal, 
6 Service Awards, Stripes and Sharpshooter (Rifle M-14 &amp; Rifle M-16).
  After serving 20 years, 4 months, and 19 days in the Army, he retired 
from active duty with an honorable discharge as Sergeant First Class on 
February 28, 1974.
  He worked a Civil Service job at the weapon pool at Ft. McClellan, AL 
after retiring from the Army. Later he fully retired to enjoy life, 
especially with his family.
  His family is his pride and joy. He has 5 children--Gwendolyn Carter, 
Harvey Doleman, Jr., Phyllis Doleman Teague, Sharon Doleman and 
Frederick Doleman.
, please join me in thanking Mr. Doleman for his service 
to our country.
I rise to recognize my departing Chief of 
Staff, Seth Scott, for his years of service to the people of Arizonas 
Fourth Congressional District. Its a bittersweet day. Seth has worked 
with me for more than a decade--half of that here in the House. I often 
say hiring him was the best career decision Ive ever made.
  Few have as broad experience in government, law, media and politics. 
He cut his teeth in the Arizona Governors office, Congress, and local 
government and ran several important political campaigns before 
returning to Arizona State University for law school. At the City of 
Phoenix and here in Congress, Seth has led my office with a steady 
hand. His acumen while serving as my Chief of Staff was always in clear 
view, and all the accomplishments we achieved would not have been 
possible without him at the helm.
  His fierce intellect, sharp political instincts and deep policy 
expertise have made him an invaluable and sought-after adviser.
  But its his loyalty, integrity and a work ethic second to none that 
have endeared Seth to all who have worked with and under him. As deftly 
as hes handled complex legislative matters, he has also cultivated and 
mentored a generation of young staffers.
  Seth has the talent and determination to succeed anywhere he 
chooses--but the people of Arizona are fortunate that he has chosen to 
devote his career to serving his community.
  He has been a great friend and trusted confidant of mine, and he will 
continue to be well after he departs--though perhaps with a few less 
late-night and early morning phone calls. I wish him all the best as he 
takes on this new challenge.