Mr. Chair, I rise today to include in the Record the 
following quotes from numerous non-profit, faith-based, and advocacy 
organizations expressing their national security concerns with the 
House Republicans 2024 State and Foreign Operations spending plans:

       The Global Health Council, together with 70+ additional 
     organizations, stated the following:
       Global Health Council and 70+ Organizations
       ``As a community of global health and development 
     advocates, we are deeply concerned with the steep cuts being 
     proposed to the House State and Foreign Operations and 
     Related Programs (SFOPS) budget at a time when the world is 
     facing concurrent destabilizing events, such as the recovery 
     from the COVID-19 pandemic, further instability and food 
     insecurity caused by the war in Ukraine, and the continuous 
     threat of emerging infectious diseases.
       The Fiscal Year (FY) 2024 budget being proposed by the 
     House Appropriations SFOPS Subcommittee falls woefully short 
     of the resources needed to address these converging crises 
     and severely undercuts critical global health and 
     humanitarian assistance programs, which are a key component 
     of how the U.S. engages with the world. According to the U.S. 
     Agency for International Development, these cuts would 
     reverse gains made to combat infectious diseases, including 
     through the Presidents Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief 
     (PEPFAR), programs to prevent maternal and childhood deaths, 
     and funds to support health workers and global health 
     security.
       This bill is a dangerous signal to the rest of the world 
     that the U.S. is ceding leadership on the global stage . . 
     .
       The Catholic Relief Services released the following 
     statement (excerpt):
       Catholic Relief Services Executive Vice President Bill 
     OKeefe
       ``Recognizing we are a blessed nation, strong bipartisan 
     majorities have long supported humanitarian and development 
     aid that has saved millions of lives, contributed to greater 
     stability and rolled back global health threats, such as HIV. 
     The Houses current proposal is a departure from this legacy 
     and threatens the lives of many around the world as well as 
     our national security.
       The United States Global Leadership Coalition (USGLC) 
     released the following statements:
       Former Secretary of Defense Dr. Mark T. Esper
       ``Americas leadership in the world cannot be left to 
     doubt. When we dont lead, we create a vacuum that will be 
     filled instead by China, which has only increased its 
     spending on defense, diplomacy, and development. Americas 
     leadership means more than just military capability; 
     diplomacy and foreign assistance are part of it too. This 
     proposed budget would upend that relationship by gutting our 
     civilian toolkit and depriving America of the diplomatic 
     leadership whose benefits I have seen last a lifetime.
       Admiral James Stavridis
       ``Senior military leaders have seen first-hand around the 
     world the risks of instability to national security, and we 
     know that responding to these threats requires more than just 
     a strong military. Significant cuts to our nations civilian 
     national security toolkit in the International Affairs Budget 
     would chart a dangerous course for the United States at this 
     pivotal moment.
       USGLC President and CEO Liz Schrayer
       ``Cutting nearly one-third of Americas footprint in the 
     world would be dangerous to our national security and 
     economic interests--undermining Americas ability to compete 
     and win on the global stage while ceding influence to China. 
     If enacted, this would be the lowest funding level for our 
     diplomacy and development toolbox in a generation at a time 
     when America is facing the greatest threats since the Cold 
     War . . .
       The American Jewish Committee stated the following 
     (excerpt):
       American Jewish Committee
       ``We are concerned by drastic cuts to the proposed FY24 
     State, Foreign Operations, and Related Programs (SFOPS) 
     appropriations bill. At just 1% of the federal budget, the 
     international affairs budget is a strategic investment that 
     advances Americas interests around the world. Strong, 
     principled American leadership in global affairs is the best 
     protection for our national security interests, the 
     preservation and advancement of democratic values and human 
     dignity, and the security of our closest allies.
       InterAction released the following statement (excerpt):
       InterAction
       ``The proposed inadequate funding levels will forcefully 
     cut short life-saving programs and weaken the United States 
     position as a global leader. The lack of investment compels 
     nations, including American allies, to seek alternative 
     solutions, accumulate more debt, or worse, go without life-
     saving support. As a result, the most vulnerable people will 
     face heightened risks, leading to a more unstable world and 
     diminishing the influence of America.
       The ONE Campaign released the following statement 
     (excerpt):
       President of The ONE Campaign Tom Hart
       ``Foreign assistance, especially development funding, is an 
     incredibly important tool to advance Americas foreign 
     policy, national security, and economic priorities. It is not 
     a handout--it is a strategic investment that can lift 
     millions out of poverty, turn the tide against deadly 
     diseases, strengthen our economy, and make America safer. 
     These shortsighted cuts will have long-term consequences, 
     jeopardize our investments, and hurt the American taxpayer.
       The Christian Connections for International Health released 
     the following statement (excerpt):
       Christian Connections for International Health
       ``Christian Connections for International Health (CCIH) is 
     alarmed and extremely disappointed that the House 
     Appropriations Subcommittee on State and Foreign Operations 
     is proposing to drastically reduce funding to life-saving 
     programs. We believe this abandons the U.S. leadership role 
     on the global stage and undermines decades of progress toward 
     sustainable health.
       CARE USA released the following statement (excerpt):
       CARE
       ``CARE is deeply disturbed by the House Subcommittee-passed 
     version of the FY24 State and Foreign Operations 
     Appropriations (SFOPS) bill. This legislation would gut the 
     foreign assistance allocation by over 30% at a time when the 
     U.S. presence in the world is vital, we have the worst global 
     hunger crisis in decades, and record levels of mass 
     migration.
I rise today as a proud member of 
the Ho-Chunk Nation of Wisconsin. I believe a big part of my role as a 
Native woman in Congress is to simply educate my colleagues about our 
federal governments relationship and responsibilities to tribes.
  That includes the hard histories between the federal government and 
our Tribal communities--things that can be difficult to face. It would 
be difficult to find a Native person that has not had the Indian 
boarding school era impact their families or community.
  It is estimated that by 1926, nearly 83 percent of Native children 
were enrolled in one of at least 367 currently known Indian boarding 
schools across 30 states. Thousands of our children were torn or 
coerced from families and communities by the federal government or 
religious entities to be ``assimilated into American society.
  Students at Indian boarding schools were forced to change their 
entire sense of being with new names, hair, language, and culture.

During these assimilation practices, many were not able to see their 
family or speak their language, and even experienced verbal and sexual 
abuse.
  There are so many stories of children that never returned home. 
Future artists, doctors, language keepers, storytellers, and leaders 
skipped generations. We still feel those impacts today.
  The federal government and our country must do better to acknowledge 
its legacy and understand the full truth of these policies.
  This Congress, Im working with Congressional Native American Caucus 
Co-chair Tom Cole on the Truth and Healing Commission on Indian 
Boarding School Policies in the United States Act. This legislation 
seeks healing for stolen Native children and their communities.
  Originally introduced by now-Secretary Deb Haaland, this bill would 
establish a formal commission to investigate, document, and acknowledge 
past injustices of the federal governments Indian Boarding School 
Policies. This commission is a critical step to allow Native families 
and communities to begin to heal.
  Representative Cole and I are in the process and narrowing down the 
legislative text and hope to introduce the bill again soon. It received 
bipartisan support in the past, which shows that our relatives are 
being seen. And both the House and the Senate held hearings on the bill 
last Congress, which shows our colleagues are ready to listen.
  The importance of fully understanding the impacts of Indian boarding 
school policies in the United States transcends political lines. And I 
know that sharing these experiences and learning the truth is a brave 
and sometimes hard thing to do.
  We hope that in this difficult process, Tribal communities will also 
support each other physically, mentally, and spiritually. I will 
continue to amplify the voices of Indian Country in the halls of 
Congress and encourage my colleagues to join me in that mission.
today, I introduce the Commission of Fine 
Arts District of Columbia Residency Act. This bill would require that a 
majority of the members of the Commission of Fine Arts (CFA) be 
District of Columbia residents.
  Under federal law and presidential executive orders (EOs), the CFA 
has review authority for federal property in D.C., certain military 
property, certain coins and medals, D.C.-owned parks and buildings and 
certain private land in D.C. Under the relevant EOs, CFA has review 
authority for the design of D.C.-owned parks and buildings. Under the 
Shipstead-Luce Act, CFA has review authority for the design of private 
buildings in D.C. ``adjacent to public buildings and grounds of major 
importance, such as Rock Creek Park and the Potomac riverfront. Under 
the Old Georgetown Act, the CFA has review authority for the design of 
private buildings in the part of Georgetown referred to as ``Old 
Georgetown in the act.
  Residency requirements for certain government positions are found in 
federal, state and D.C. law, including for members of the National 
Capital Planning Commission. The primary reason such laws exist is so 
that government officials have a connection to the residents they serve 
and in-depth knowledge of the unique issues and challenges faced by 
residents.
  I have also introduced the Commission of Fine Arts District of 
Columbia Home Rule Act, which would remove the authority of the CFA 
over non-federal real property in D.C. However, while the CFA maintains 
that authority, a majority of the members should be D.C. residents.
  I urge my colleagues to support this bill.
today, I introduce the District of Columbia 
Courts Home Rule Act. This bill would give the Council of the District 
of Columbia authority over the jurisdiction and organization of the 
local D.C. courts. The D.C. Home Rule Act (HRA) expressly prohibits the 
Council from enacting any law with respect to any title 11 of the D.C. 
Code, which relates to the jurisdiction and organization of the local 
D.C. courts. Congress can correct this injustice to D.C. residents, who 
pay all federal taxes, by amending the HRA, even before D.C. becomes 
the 51st state.
  Fifty years after passage of the HRA, matters involving the local 
D.C. courts almost never come to Congress, so Congress knows virtually 
nothing about D.C.s local courts--and could not care less. 
Notwithstanding the importance of D.C.s local courts to D.C. 
residents, the Council, which is the repository of knowledge and 
experience for D.C.s criminal and civil justice systems and the body 
accountable to D.C. residents, is irresponsibly left on the sidelines 
while Congress remains the sole entity that may correct flaws in D.C.s 
local courts.
  Under the HRA, the Council has no authority to ``enact any act, 
resolution, or rule with respect to any provision of title 11 of the 
District of Columbia Code (relating to organization and jurisdiction of 
the District of Columbia courts). Matters in title 11 primarily 
relate to the rules of criminal and civil procedure, court 
administration, the branches of the courts, the rules of jury service 
and admission to the bar. This bill would strike this limitation on the 
Councils authority.
  D.C. has never had authority over its local courts, even when it was 
responsible for paying for their operations. Under the National Capital 
Revitalization and Self-Government Improvement Act of 1997, the federal 
government assumed the costs for several state-level functions, 
including the courts. This bill would not change the courts funding. 
This bill also would not change the authority of the President to 
nominate, or the Senate to confirm, local D.C. judges, which has been 
within their purview since the creation of the modern local court 
system in 1970.
  This bill is an important step to increase democratic self-government 
for D.C. I urge my colleagues to support this bill.
I voted in favor of Roll Call No. 507, H.R. 
4368, the Agriculture, Rural Development, Food and Drug Administration, 
and Related Agencies Appropriations Act of 2024, in order for the 
appropriations process to move forward. However, I do have some 
concerns about certain provisions and cuts in the underlying bill. 
Watershed programs, rural energy and broadband grants, and water and 
wastewater projects are just a few programs that are of vital 
importance to my district and need adequate funding. As the 
appropriations process continues, I look forward to working with my 
colleagues to ensure the needs of rural America are met.
I rise today to recognize and support 
International Plasma Awareness Week (IPAW), October 2-6, both in the 
United States and around the world. Patients across the globe rely on 
medicines made from donated human plasma to lead productive, healthy 
lives. The need for plasma donation is ongoing--plasma is the starting 
ingredient for numerous lifesaving therapies to treat individuals 
living with rare diseases. This week, patients, plasma donors, and 
plasma donation centers will join together to raise global awareness of 
the crucial need for plasma, recognize the contributions of plasma 
donors, and call attention to the many rare diseases treated with 
plasma protein therapies.
  Donors and patients alike will observe IPAW through a range of events 
seeking to enhance awareness of plasma-derived therapies and 
recombinant analogs, collectively known as plasma protein therapies. 
These are unique biologic medicines that are either infused or injected 
to treat a variety of rare, life-threatening, chronic, and genetic 
diseases. This includes bleeding disorders, hereditary angioedema, 
immune deficiencies, pulmonary disorders, neurological disorders, and 
infectious diseases such as tetanus, hepatitis, and rabies.
  Plasma protein therapies have significantly improved the quality of 
life, markedly improved patient outcomes, and extended the life 
expectancy of patients across the country. Healthy, committed donors 
provide the human plasma essential to manufacture these lifesaving 
therapies. There are now over 1,100 plasma collection centers in the 
U.S. that have demonstrated their commitment to donor safety and 
quality by earning International Quality Plasma Program (IQPP) 
certification.
  As the co-chair of the Rare Disease Congressional Caucus. I 
understand that hundreds of thousands of Americans with rare diseases 
rely on plasma protein therapies that are only available because of the 
commitment of dedicated plasma donors. For example, Americans living 
with primary immunodeficiencies (PI) require intravenous immunoglobulin 
(IVIG) treatments derived from plasma donors. Without timely care, even 
the most common infections can present the risk of serious illness or 
death for these patients. That is why I introduced the PI Post Acute 
Access Act, which would expand access to IVIG treatment for Medicare 
beneficiaries with PI in skilled nursing facilities. I have long 
advocated to ensure access to IVIG treatments, and I will continue to 
fight to ensure all Americans, including rare disease patients, have 
access to the innovative treatments they need.
  I ask that my colleagues in the House of Representatives join me and 
rise in commemoration of International Plasma Awareness Week, honoring 
those committed donors and donation centers that make and collect 
needed and lifesaving contributions.