Pro Tempore, I rise today to honor the 
extraordinary life and legacy of a talented journalist, truth seeker, 
and man of great integrity, former Montgomery Advertiser reporter Alvin 
Stanley Benn, who passed away on October 10, 2023, at the age of 83.
  Alvin Benn was born on April 25, 1940, in Lancaster, Pennsylvania. 
Upon graduating from Manheim Township High School in 1958, Alvin Benn 
enlisted in the United States Marine Corps. Throughout his six years of 
service, Alvin Benn traveled the world after being stationed in Cherry 
Point, North Carolina, and Okinawa, Japan. While stationed in Japan, he 
pursued his passion for journalism, working for the Armed Forces Radio 
and Television Service. He continued his education in the United States 
at the Great Lakes Naval Training Center, completing military 
journalism school.
  In 1964, Alvin Benn began what would be a lifechanging career 
chronicling the history of Alabama. He made his mark on journalism as a 
minted correspondent for the United Press International, covering the 
sweeping Civil Rights Movement. Interviewing the leading voices on each 
side, such as Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., and Alabama Governor George 
C. Wallace, his holistic approach to reporting exposed the true story 
of the Civil Rights Movement, bringing the reality of the fight for 
rights and liberties to homes nationwide. For over two years, Alvin 
Benn led the United Press Internationals Birmingham Bureau, taking on 
multiple roles that supported the publication, including bureau chief, 
writer, editor, photographer, and producer. He contributed to 
newspapers across the Southeast, including the Decatur Daily in 
Decatur, Alabama from 1967 through 1974; the Natchez Democrat in 
Natchez, Mississippi; the Selma Times Journal in Selma, Alabama; and 
publications in Alexander City, Alabama; and Lafayette, Georgia, before 
settling in Selma, where he lived for over 40 years.
  During his time at the Natchez Democrat, Alvin Benn and the news 
staff received a nomination for the prestigious Pulitzer Prize. In 
1980, he joined the Montgomery Advertiser, where he would spend over 20 
years. In his 50-plus-year career, Alvin Benn produced over three to 
four stories per day before retiring in 2003. Retirement did not curb 
his desire to continue writing, nor did it decrease his readership. 
``Al Benns Alabama continued to be a widely read column in the 
Montgomery Advertiser and served as the cherry on top of Alvin Benns 
storied contributions to journalism. From interviewing United States 
presidents to writing a book titled ``Reporter: Covering the Civil 
Rights . . . . And Wrongs in Dixie, Alvin Benn is an Alabama gem 
whose

dedication to ``journalistic integrity continued to inspire us all.
  Alvin Benn is the recipient of many awards and recognitions, 
including the Lifetime Achievement Award from the Alabama Press 
Association, the Communications Award from the Alabama Farmers 
Association, and the Distinguished Alabama Community Journalist award 
from the Auburn University Department of Journalism.
  Alvin Benn was a proud member of the Mishkan Israel Congregation in 
our hometown of Selma, Alabama, and the Temple Beth Or in Montgomery, 
Alabama.
  Alvin Benn is preceded in death by his wife of almost 60 years, 
Sharon Ann Boumel Benn. He is survived by their two children, Danielle 
Waters and Eric Benn; four grandchildren, Benjamin Waters, Scott 
Waters, Alexandria Benn, and Ilan Benn; son-in-law, Curtis Waters and 
daughter-in-law, Maria Benn; and a host of family and friends.
  On a personal note, I grew up right down the street from the Benn 
family. In fact, his son, Eric, was my siblings best friend and my 
third little brother. Everywhere Andrew and Anthony went, Eric went 
too. They are best friends and truly brothers. The Sewells are blessed 
to have grown up with the Benns, and we remain good friends and family 
for a lifetime.
a special talent for crafting 
his words into storytelling. He wrote the first article about my 
scholarship to Princeton University and subsequently, wrote about every 
major event in my lifes journey, from joining the rowing crew at 
Oxford to getting elected Alabamas First Black Congresswoman. If 
anything happened in Selma or the Black Belt, Mr. Benn knew about it 
and reported on it. Spanning a career of decades, Mr. Benn told the 
history of Alabamas Black Belt--the events, the characters, and all 
the happenings. What a gift his writings will leave in the annuals of 
Alabamas history. His legacy will live on through the mini-stories and 
all the lives that he touched. Rest in peace and power.
  On behalf of Alabamas 7th Congressional District, I ask my 
colleagues to join me in celebrating the extraordinary life and legacy 
of Alvin Stanley Benn for his contributions to journalism and decades 
of exemplary service to the State of Alabama.
Pro Tempore, Oct. 7th is a day 
that will live in infamy as the most gruesome terrorist attack in the 
history of the Jewish State.
  Thousands of Israelis were murdered, raped, tortured, and abducted as 
hostages. Ten percent of the members of an Israeli kibbutz, Kfar Asar, 
were massacred.
  About 260 young Israelis partying at a music festival were gunned 
down. Babies were butchered, burned and beheaded.
  The ONLY morally acceptable response to such incomprehensible terror 
is overwhelming outrage at the boundless barbarism of Hamas.
  While most of the civilized world, led by President Biden, rightly 
recoiled in horror at Hamas and condemned its terrorism immediately and 
unequivocally, Israels ideological enemies here in the US found cause 
for celebration at the sight of dead Jews.
  Imagine, for a moment, the inconsolable grief of a Jewish mother 
whose baby has been butchered to death. Could you imagine anything more 
callous and cruel than telling that grieving mother: You had it coming. 
You and your people brought the terror upon yourselves.
  Those were the shocking sentiments of the New York City-Democratic 
Socialists of America (NYC-DSA), which wasted no time in holding a hate 
rally romanticizing the terrorism of Hamas as ``resistance.
  The DSA was hardly alone in blaming the victims of terrorism rather 
than the terrorists themselves.
  Something is rotten in the state of America. When the institutional 
leaders in our country cannot condemn the cold-blooded murder of 
Israeli children and civilians with moral clarity, one must ask: what 
kind of society are we becoming?
  What does the silence and indifference and cowardice--from these so-
called leaders--tell us about the depth of anti-Semitism in America and 
the reckoning required?
  The time has come to confront not only the symptoms but the disease: 
a Democratic Socialist industrial complex that indoctrinates young 
Americans with an anti-Israel hatred so virulent that it renders them 
indifferent to the deadliest massacre of Jews since the Holocaust.
  Anti-Israel extremism, which has been given a veneer of mainstream 
respectability in law schools and legislatures, is aided and abetted by 
the sheer spinelessness of so-called ``leaders--from public officials 
to the presidents of colleges and universities.
  Days of silence were often followed by words of cowardice, if there 
were any words at all.
  Northwestern University, for example, said it had no plans to ``put 
out a statement officially stating a University position. Imagine 
that: a university that cannot be bothered to take a position on a 
pogrom against Jews. Have we learned nothing from the long and ugly 
history of Anti-Semitism?
  There is nothing accidental about the disregard for Israeli life that 
revealed itself in the wake of Oct. 7. The dehumanization of Israeli 
victims follows inevitably from the hyperbolic and systematic 
demonization of Israel itself.
  Anti-Israel hate and hysteria have been allowed to fester freely in 
academia, social media, the political arena, and elsewhere. It has been 
propagated by Astroturf activists and academics, amplified by their 
enablers in elected office, and subsidized by government and civil 
society.
  When people are made to believe the most dangerous lies about 
Israel--that Israel is the root of all evil on earth; that it is a 
``75-year occupation that must be wiped off the map from the ``river 
to the sea; that Israelis are not civilians but settlers who can be 
fairly targeted for ``resistance; that Israelis are committing 
genocide and ethnic cleansing against the Palestinians and harvesting 
their organs and using the blood of their children; that Israel is 
always the aggressor and Hamas always the resister: when you tell so 
many lies and incite so much hate, what do you think will happen?
  How do you think the believers internalizing these lies will respond 
to the savage slaughter of Israelis? This is a moral monstrosity made 
in America, and one that America must unmake.
  The anti-Israel hate increasingly possessing the American mind is a 
demon that must be exorcised from our body politic. For America cannot 
long remain a decent society if the next generation of Americans are 
made to be indifferent to the barbaric butchering of Israeli civilians 
and children.
  I, for one, stand with Israel as it seeks to defend itself. Despite 
the profound pain of the present, Israel will emerge from it all better 
and stronger than ever before.
  It will outlive the pernicious lies and the dangerous demagogues who 
tell them. It will outlive the extremism of the DSA and BDS. It will 
outlive the terrorism of Iran and its proxies, Hamas and Hezbollah.
  Israel will live on--for the next 75 years and beyond. Resilience is 
the DNA and destiny of the Jewish people and the Jewish State. It 
always has been and always will be. I am as certain of that as I am of 
anything. The Jewish Nation lives on (Am Yisrael Chai).
Pro Tempore, I rise today to recognize and 
celebrate a remarkable milestone: the 100th birthday of Harold L. 
Gomer, a Navy Veteran who embodies dedication, service, and love.
  At the age of 7, Harolds father passed away and his mother and 5 
siblings relocated to Austin, Minnesota. Harold would spend the next 86 
years of his life in this new city and would grow to become an example 
to many.
  Education played a significant role in shaping Harolds character--he 
graduated from Austin High School, where he participated in wrestling 
and Golden Glove Boxing. He excelled in his extracurriculars and 
eventually became a District Flyweight Champion, showcasing both his 
talent and tenacity.
  On November 6, 1942, Harold bravely answered the call to serve his 
country. He left his job to join the United States Navy, where he 
served as Coxswain aboard the USS Ammen in the Pacific theater for 3 
years. His unwavering dedication and service enabled him to serve on 
the USS Logic Minesweeper for an additional year before being honorably 
discharged.
  Once returning to Austin, he resumed his employment at Hormel Meats, 
where he spent the following 40 years exhibiting dedication to his work 
and his community.
  After returning home from defending our country, Mr. Gomer married 
his childhood sweetheart, Shirley Mae Greenlee. Their family grew with 
the addition of their 4 children: Patricia, Mark, Cheri, and Pamela. 
Over the years, the family has grown to include 9 grandchildren, 15 
great-grandchildren, and 10 great-great-grandchildren. In 2016, 
following the death of his wife, Harold moved to Orange County, 
California to live with his daughter Pam. Since relocating to Orange 
County, he has been enjoying retirement, occasionally going dancing and 
visiting Las Vegas.
  Since then, he has discovered happiness in dancing and enjoying the 
company of his family and friends. Harolds relentless dedication to 
his country and community is highlighted throughout his life, from his 
2 years as commander of American Legion Post 91 and his 40 years of 
dedication to the Funeral Escort, to his 20 years of cooking for stag 
nights and his more than 30 years of bar management. These experiences 
show he is a leader who gives back to others.
  I ask my colleagues to join me in expressing heartfelt 
congratulations and honoring Harold Gomers character, service, and 
love for his community as we wish him a happy 100th birthday.
Pro Tempore, I rise today to recognize the 
175th anniversary of Carthage, Texas.
  Carthage, a vibrant and historic city nestled in the heart of East 
Texas, is celebrating its 175th anniversary on November 11, 2023. This 
remarkable milestone is a testament to the resilience, spirit, and rich 
heritage that has shaped the community of Carthage over the years.
  Since its founding in 1848, Carthage has grown from a humble 
settlement to a thriving city that stands as a beacon of progress and 
unity. The citys commitment to fostering a strong sense of community 
and preserving its unique heritage is truly commendable.
  Carthage stands as a shining example of what can be achieved when a 
community comes together with a shared vision and a commitment to 
excellence. I urge all of my colleagues to join me in recognizing and 
celebrating the 175th anniversary of Carthages founding. 
Congratulations to Carthage on this momentous milestone. May the next 
175 years be filled with continued growth, prosperity, and community 
pride. Happy anniversary, Carthage.
Pro Tempore, today I pay tribute to the 
hardworking men and women of the Lansing Board of Water and Light, a 
municipally-owned public utility in Michigans 7th Congressional 
District for their efforts to restore service following storms that 
moved through Michigan on Thursday, August 24 and Friday, August 25, 
2023. In a matter of hours, six tornadoes swept across the state, 
leaving a trail of devastation from west to east. Five people died, 
dozens of homes and businesses were destroyed, and hundreds of 
thousands of Michiganders were left in the dark due to power outages.
  Under these most pressing circumstances, more than 40 percent of 
LBWLs customers were affected by the storm, including 612 unique power 
outage locations, 835 downed wires, 47 broken poles, and 187 
transformers knocked offline. In the challenging days that followed the 
storms, LBWL sent an unprecedented number of crews into the field, 
calling in mutual aid from across Michigan and around the country. In 
total, 45 tree crews, 57 line crews, and 162 spotters worked around the 
clock in difficult conditions, restoring power to 98 percent of 
customers in a matter of days.
  That effort was born of experience. After a similarly devastating ice 
storm hit the region 10 years ago, LBWL implemented all the 
recommendations from an independent investigation into the storm 
response, spending millions on proactive tree-trimming, expanding 
mutual aid agreements, hardening its communication plan, and revamping 
the entire corporate structure. This organizational soul-searching has 
paid off, with vastly improved reliability and response time when it 
matters most.
  The work of LBWL crews, and crews from across the country, was 
difficult and even dangerous, requiring long hours and high skill to 
bring the power back for hundreds of customers. That hard work and 
dedication deserve recognition here.
Pro Tempore, I rise today to honor 
the life and selfless service of Kenneth A. Mills, a U.S. Army veteran 
who bravely served during the Korean War and passed earlier in October.
  A beloved member of our Evesham community, many knew Ken as a person 
that was deeply committed to family, his community,

and our country. After graduating high school, Ken enlisted in the U.S. 
Army, where he was later stationed in Korea and served there for 3 
years. After his honorable discharge in 1955, Kens service was highly 
honored, as he earned two Bronze Stars, the Korean War Service Medal, 
and the United Nations Service Medal.
  Beyond his service to our country, Ken went above and beyond in his 
personal and professional life to care for those around him. While 
starting a family of his own in Rockwood, Michigan, with his wife, 
Betty, Ken also started his career as a union representative, before 
eventually transitioning into a long, accomplished tenure in Human 
Resources. Eventually stepping up as the Director of Human Resources 
for Allied Signal, Ken became a strong leader of their department, 
working on behalf of the people, and traveling across the country 
before eventually settling in Marlton, New Jersey.
  It was in Marlton that Ken became a dedicated member of the St. Joan 
of Arc parish, our local government, and the town watch. Through his 
involvement across multiple organizations, he took every opportunity to 
facilitate projects to make our community a better, safer place. Most 
recently, he focused his vision on the Evesham Township Veterans Wall 
of Honor in the Evesham Township Municipal Building. Ken played a vital 
role in the `Coffee with a Vet program as well as the local Veterans 
of Foreign Wars chapter.
  No matter the task--big or small--Ken proved every day that he was a 
deep believer that it was always possible for each person to create 
positive change in their community. Even beyond Eveshams borders, he 
dedicated his time as the President of the Boys &amp; Girls Club of 
Philadelphia, uplifting kids and young adults across the area. I know 
Ken will have the lasting memory of being a friendly face around town, 
often riding his lawn mower through the neighborhood with a warm smile 
and helping hand for whomever may need one.
  We were lucky to have Ken as a member of our community. He was a 
beloved husband, father, and neighbor. My heart goes out to his entire 
family, his friends, and for anyone who knew him and grieving his loss. 
Though he will be deeply missed, I am sure his legacy will live on for 
years to come through his positive impacts on all our lives.
Pro Tempore, I rise today to recognize 
the contributions of Contra Costa Television (CCTV) as we commemorate 
Free Speech Week and Community Media Day.
  Since its inception in 1994, CCTV has sought to provide community 
members with critical information, helping to keep our community 
connected and residents abreast of local issues. CCTV provides coverage 
of local government meetings, public safety information, local sports, 
and other community events with the goal of making local journalism 
accessible to all. CCTV livestreams to their website and social media 
platforms and provides twenty-four hour broadcasting, providing Contra 
Costans with convenient access to breaking news, important community 
updates, and more. CCTV has continually shown its dedication to sharing 
our communitys stories and connecting Contra Costa residents.
  CCTV has also partnered with the County Clerk-Recorder-Elections 
Department and local chapters of the League of Women Voters to provide 
voters with up-to-date reporting on candidates and ballot measures. A 
well-informed public is vital to any healthy democracy and Im proud of 
CCTVs contributions to provide locally-produced voter education 
programming.
  CCTV has received many accolades for its outstanding programing. The 
Veterans Voices program received the Western Alliance Video Excellence 
award in 2016 and 2018 and the California State Association of Counties 
2015 Merit Award.
  Please join me in honoring Contra Costa Television as we commemorate 
Free Speech Week and Community Media Day.
Pro Tempore, I rise to honor the Vietnam and 
Korean War veterans who traveled to Washington, D.C. on October 18, 
2023, with Honor Flight Chicago, a program that provides WWII, Vietnam, 
and Korean War veterans the opportunity to visit their memorials on The 
National Mall in Washington, D.C. These memorials were built to honor 
their courage and service to their country.
  The American Veteran is one of our greatest treasures. The Soldiers, 
Airmen, Sailors, Marines, and Coast Guardsmen who traveled here on 
October 18th answered our nations call to service during one of its 
greatest times of need. From the Pacific Asian Theatre to the Korean 
Theater, these brave Americans risked life and limb, gave service, and 
sacrificed much, all while embodying what it is to be a hero. We owe 
them more gratitude than can ever be expressed.
  I welcome these brave veterans to Washington and to their memorials. 
I am proud to include in the Record the names of these men and women 
for all to see, hear, and recognize, and I call on my colleagues to 
rise and join me in expressing gratitude.
  Mario R. Aliano, Sr., Peter Ralph Amodei, Ronald Angone, James Larry 
Arnold, Dennis J. Asch, Leonard Austin, Joseph T. Bienias, Ronald M. 
Bienias, Robert Bom, Thomas Brackenbury, Scott Lee Brighton, Terrence 
V. Burns, Donald T. Catchpole, John K. Clauson, David M. Clemen, 
Maurice J. Costello, William T. Coughlin, William A. Cox, Ronald L. 
Cummins, Dan A. Dahlquist, John Diehl, James Doffin, Charles A. Doiron, 
Jr., James M. Donahue, Mitchell G. Doud, James Drnek, George Joseph 
Durfor, Steven M. Dyer, Walter L. Favorite, Melvin L. Fonville, Rodney 
Foster, Ronald E. Foster, Carol J. Fowler, Gilbert F. Garcia, Raymond 
Gervais, Richard W. Giemzik, George N. Gray, Robert Grenlie, Louis 
Gugliuzza, Alvaro Guillen Jr., Dale Hamblin, Bruce Hansen, Henry 
Harris, Jackie Haviland, George Elmer Hessenthaler, Maurice Holman, 
George Hosso, John W. Huff, Tom Jackson, Martin D. Jayne, James Jensen, 
William Johnson, J. Malia Jones, David Kapella, Robert F. Kelly, Edward 
Allen Kimmey, Louis M. King, Arthur Landorf, Thomas W. Leitner, Thomas 
H. Lichtenfeld, Ronald William Line, Jerome Lorenz, Felipe Marrero, 
Michael Martino, Abraham Matook, Edward Maynard, Jr., Russel E. 
McClintock, William J. Mesheimer, Robert E. Miller, David E. Miller, 
Francis L. Minnito, Thomas J. Moran, Peggy Morris, David Myers, Joseph 
Offenbecher, Edward Lee Oller, Bruce E. Parry, James Patnode, Adis 
Patrick, Joseph P. Phelan, Terry L. Pierson, William A. Polensky, James 
E. Popjoy, James Purcell, Raymond Ritcheson, Jr., Robert Ross, David A. 
Sandeno, Thomas L. Schambach, James Scherbarth, Michael Scherer, 
. Schulte, Kenneth Schussler, Andrew Sherlag, 
Michael A. Snyder, Donald B. Snyder, Ronald J. Soltis, Craig Summers, 
David Harry Swanson, Ronald Joseph Szikora, Donald D. Talbot, Anthony 
Turacek, Charles J. Vladika, William A. Ward, Arthur A. Warner, Thomas 
Wasmund, Robert A. Welko, John A. Wentz, Sr., James Wiginton, Johnnie 
Lewis Williams, Leon Withers.
Pro Tempore, I rise today along with my 
colleague, Representative Mike Quigley, to celebrate one of 
Chicagolands very own, legendary meteorologist Tom Skilling, and his 
45-year career as a beloved presence on our local airwaves as he 
embarks on his well-deserved retirement.
  As the longtime chief meteorologist for WGN-TV, Tom Skilling has been 
one of the most trusted figures on television screens throughout the 
Chicago area for decades, expertly and calmly explaining the regions 
often unpredictable weather situations for generations of viewers.
  I am especially proud to say that Tom Skilling is an Aurora, Illinois 
native, and a proud graduate of West Aurora High School. After 
completing his studies at the University of Wisconsin, Tom worked 
briefly on local television stations in Madison and Milwaukee before 
landing at WGN-TV, where he quickly became a daily fixture in 
households throughout Chicago and the suburbs.
  Those of us who know Tom and have worked with him over the course of 
his career know how passionate he is about his work and how talented he 
is at communicating often complex scientific data to people of all ages 
and backgrounds. But his greatest strength is the kindness with which 
he treats everyone he interacts with; he is always ready to greet a fan 
with a warm smile and meaningful conversation.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in 
celebrating Tom Skilling and his decades of service to the Chicagoland 
community and offer him our most sincere best wishes on the next 
chapter of his life.
Pro Tempore, I rise today to introduce the 
Promoting Reduction of Emissions through Landscaping Equipment Act. 
This crucial legislation provides businesses with a significant tool as 
they transition toward a more sustainable and consumer-friendly future.
  This essential and forward-thinking piece of legislation provides a 
40 percent credit on the purchase of zero-emission equipment, such as 
mowers, leaf blowers, hedgers, and accessories, up to $25,000 every 
year and up to $100,000 over the course of 10 consecutive years. The 
tax credit, which applies to any equipment purchased on or after 
January 1, 2023, also extends to retrofitting equipment that transforms 
gas-powered devices to zero-emission. These credits cover batteries, 
generators, retrofitting equipment, and other necessary accessories.
  Currently, there are over 300 restrictions on the use of gas-powered 
lawn equipment across the country, as more localities recognize the 
need to transition to quieter, less polluting equipment. The bill will 
assist local businesses as they adapt to local ordinances and consumer 
demand for better, cleaner, and quieter equipment while reducing their 
costs over time through lower maintenance expenses and reduced reliance 
on fossil fuels. Moreover, the bill is compatible with local and state 
voucher and rebate programs for zero-emission equipment like the 
programs in my home State of California.
  Current gas-powered equipment emits pollutants, including nitrogen 
oxides (NO&lt;inf&gt;X&lt;/inf&gt;), carbon dioxide (CO&lt;inf&gt;2&lt;/inf&gt;), reactive 
organic gases (ROG), and particulate matter that negatively impact the 
climate, air quality, ecosystems, and are potentially harmful to human 
health, especially for the workers who operate the equipment. These 
appliances generate significant noise pollution that can damage human 
hearing, disturb wildlife, and interfere with life and work. Replacing 
gas-powered equipment with zero-emission equipment would improve air 
quality, reduce noise pollution, and protect operators of the equipment 
from hearing loss and other potentially negative health effects.
  I am also very proud to share that this legislation has garnered 
widespread support from numerous national, state, and regional 
organizations, including industry, environmental, and health-focused 
groups. The National Association of Landscape Professionals, American 
Lung Association, Environmental Defense Fund, Earthjustice, the Asthma 
and Allergy Foundation of America, Sierra Club, American Green Zone 
Alliance, California Landscape Contractors Association, California 
Alliance for Golf, California Golf Course Owners Association, Golf 
Course Superintendents Association of Northern California, Golf Course 
Superintendents Association of Southern California, Golf Course 
Superintendents Association of America, and AmericanHort, California 
Landscape Contractors Association, California Alliance for Golf, 
California Golf Course Owners Association, Golf Course Superintendents 
Association of Northern California, Golf Course Superintendents 
Association of Southern California, Colorado Nursery &amp; Greenhouse 
Association, Florida Nursery, Growers &amp; Landscape Association, Georgia 
Urban Ag Council, Georgia Green Industry Association, Idaho Nursery and 
Landscape Association, Illinois Landscape Contractors Association, 
Kansas Nursery and Landscape Association, Louisiana Nursery and 
Landscape Association, Maine Landscape and Nursery Association, 
Maryland Nursery, Landscape, and Greenhouse Association, Massachusetts 
Nursery and Landscape Association, Inc., Michigan Green Industry 
Association, Michigan Nursery and Landscape Association, Montana 
Nursery &amp; Landscape Association, New Jersey Landscape Contractors 
Association, New Jersey Nursery &amp; Landscape Association, New York State 
Nursery and Landscape Association, NorCal Sports Field Management 
Association, Ohio Green Industry Association, Oregon Association of 
Nurseries, Pennsylvania Landscape &amp; Nursery Association, Virginia 
Nursery &amp; Landscape Association, Washington Association of Landscape 
Professionals, Washington State Nursery &amp; Landscape Association, West 
Virginia Nursery &amp; Landscape Association, Wisconsin Landscape 
Contractors Association. These endorsements underscore the importance 
and benefit of this bill in advancing the transition to sustainable 
equipment.
  This bill isnt just about supporting the growth of our landscaping 
businesses; it exemplifies our commitment to a smooth, realistic 
transition towards more sustainable, consumer-friendly, and 
environmentally-responsible business practices. This legislation is a 
win for local businesses, the environment, and our health.
  I hope my colleagues will join me in supporting this crucial 
initiative.
Pro Tempore, I rise to recognize 
Kathleen OBrien Ham for her forty years of work in wireless 
telecommunications advocacy, and to congratulate her on her retirement 
as T-Mobiles Senior Vice President for Government Affairs.
  Throughout her nearly 20 years with T-Mobile, Kathleen has been 
instrumental in leading the companys public policy practice. She was 
responsible for engaging federal and state governments and agencies to 
advance a wide range of priorities for T-Mobile, including radio 
spectrum and consumer safety matters.
  Kathleens fourteen years of prior experience at the Federal 
Communications Commission equipped her well for the landmark 
achievements she accomplished during her tenure at T-Mobile. Thanks to 
her unmatched focus on industry competition and doing more for 
consumers, T-Mobile became the first telecommunications provider to 
offer 5G network coverage in all 50 states, expanding wireless access 
for millions of Americans across the country.
  From testifying before Congress to spearheading T-Mobiles efforts to 
secure additional spectrum, Kathleen laid the groundwork for the 
companys growth and innovation in recent years. Under her oversight, 
T-Mobile closed its merger with Sprint after a successful two-year 
policy and regulatory campaign, positioning T-Mobile as the countrys 
leading 5G wireless provider and strengthening the companys 
competitiveness for years to come.
, I thank Kathleen OBrien Ham for her career 
helping T-Mobile thrive and subsequently doing more for American 
consumers, and I wish her a happy retirement.