Im honored to recognize the historic 
Friendship Hose Company No. 1 on its 150th Anniversary.
  The Friendship Hose Company No. 1 has provided fire protection dating 
back to the 1830s--with the purchase of a fire engine called ``Juno--
originating in Newville Pennsylvania. Formally established on January 
14, 1874, the then-Newville Fire Company officially formed and elected 
its first officers. Facing the continuous challenges of staffing and 
funding, the Friendship Hose Company No. 1 endured and prevailed when 
other fire companies fell short.
  Over the past 150 years, the Friendship Hose Company No. 1 has 
operated out of three locations in our community, has had hundreds of 
members, and currently operates with approximately 20-25 active 
volunteers. Under the current leadership of President Trent Wagner and 
Fire Chief David Bobb, the Company continues to serve our community 
through tireless service and heroic work in fire protection.
, Im honored and privileged to recognize the Friendship 
Hose Company No. 1 on their 150th Anniversary. Their selfless and 
tireless service to the community, Commonwealth, and Nation is the 
standard by which we should all be judged. I wish them Godspeed in 
their continued endeavors and pray for their safety and security for 
years to come.
I rise today to honor Brigadier General 
Kevin Stewart, the first President and CEO of the Carolina Museum of 
the Marine. BGen Stewart, an Iraq and Afghanistan War veteran, has 
served our Nation and his community with great honor and integrity. He 
retired from the Marine Corps in 2021 as the Director of the Global 
Operations Center at U.S. Transportation Command. He also served as the 
Commanding General of the 2nd Marine Logistics Group at Marine Corps 
Base Camp Lejeune, as well as Chief of Staff for the Deputy Commandant 
for Installations and Logistics, at the United States Marine Corps 
headquarters.
  In his two years as CEO, BGen Stewart has demonstrated remarkable 
fundraising and marketing prowess. He secured $4 million from the state 
government, over $1.9 million in private sector donations, and 
additional funds from the city and county governments. He also launched 
the first regional TV and live-streaming ad campaign for the Carolina 
Museum of the Marine. BGen Stewart implemented the organizations first 
brand guidelines and upgraded the website.
  Under his leadership, the Carolina Museum of the Marine is coming to 
life. BGen Stewart is to be commended for assembling a team of 
outstanding design and construction firms and finalizing the necessary 
approvals for the museum. The official groundbreaking earlier this year 
celebrated the start of museum construction, and you can now see the 
walls going up as you drive by the Lejeune Memorial Gardens. To support 
this physical progress, he also strengthened the museums organization, 
building a top-notch staff, improving fiscal management, and planning 
for its operations.
  This transformational project is becoming so much more than just a 
museum and far surpassing traditional expectations. BGen Stewart led 
development of the Carolina Museum of the Marines Al Gray Marine 
Leadership Forum that teaches the core values of the Marine Corps, 
strategic thinking, and leadership traits. He oversaw construction of 
the studio for the Leadership Forum and helped to shape the compelling 
programming created there.
  Words do little justice when trying to fully capture the 
contributions BGen Stewart has made to our great Nation and to the 
development of this museum from the ground up. His talent and 
leadership skills are truly second to none. It has been an honor to 
witness his efforts to memorialize the history of our beloved Sailors 
and Marines in the Carolinas. I wish BGen Stewart swift recovery and 
look forward to seeing all that he accomplishes in the future.
on behalf of Arizonas 8th Congressional 
District, I would like to recognize the mayor of Glendale, Arizona, 
Jerry Weiers.
  Originally born in South Dakota, Mayor Weiers moved to Phoenix as a 
child where he went on to serve in the Arizona House of Representatives 
before becoming mayor of Glendale in 2012. Outside of public service, 
Mayor Weiers was also a proud small-business owner and family man.
  During his time in both the state legislature and as mayor of 
Glendale, Mayor Weiers has been a strong advocate for the military and 
veterans, reduced bureaucratic red tape, and created conditions for 
small businesses to thrive. As mayor, he has created a thriving 
business-sector through public-private partnerships, increased public 
safety, worked toward reducing homelessness, and been a strong advocate 
for Luke Air Force Base and Glendales veterans.
  His successes in public service have left a lasting impact on both 
the Glendale community and the state of Arizona as a whole. I thank him 
for his service.
on behalf of Arizonas 8th Congressional 
District, it is my

honor to recognize Arizona State Representative Joseph Chaplik from 
Legislative District 3, covering the northeast valley in the Phoenix-
metro area.
  For almost three decades, Joseph has been a successful business 
executive. He is the founder of Joseph Bernard Investment Real Estate, 
handling more than one billion dollars of sales volume. The Portland 
Business Journal recognized him as one of the Top 40 Under 40 Business 
Leaders, and he has won awards including Business Ethics Finalist and 
Top Corporate Philanthropy.
  As a member of the Arizona Legislature, Representative Chaplik has 
sponsored many bills that reflect the values of our great state, 
including proposals to enhance our border security, election integrity, 
and economic freedom.
  Arizonas 8th Congressional District is thankful for Representative 
Chapliks endeavors on behalf of his district and our state. We are 
fortunate to have someone of his caliber and achievements in the State 
Legislature.
I rise today to honor my constituent, Natalia 
Rustand, who

worked in partnership with her peers to put together a Fight Back 
Against Fentanyl PSA.
  Natalia is from St. Paul Park, Minnesota. She has proven her 
commitment to combating the opioid crisis through her advocacy and work 
with the Devin Norring Foundation. The Devin Norring Foundation was 
established to honor Devins legacy and raise awareness about the 
dangers of illicit drugs and fentanyl.
  On April 4, 2020, Devin passed away from fentanyl poisoning. He was 
seeking relief from blackout migraines and dental pain. He bought what 
he thought was Percocet marketed by a drug dealer on Snapchat. That 
pill turned out to be 100 percent fentanyl.
  Devin was 19 years old.
  The Devin Norring Foundation, in partnership with Natalia, produced 
an impactful and heartfelt PSA to fight back against fentanyl. In 
turning grief into activism, Natalia has shown strength and courage 
beyond her years. I am proud to have her as a constituent and an ally 
in this fight against the fentanyl crisis.
  I thank Natalia for demonstrating a commitment to combating the 
opioid crisis.
I rise today to honor Natalia Shevtsova, who 
worked in partnership with her peers to put together a Fight Back 
Against Fentanyl PSA.
  Natalia is from St. Paul, Minnesota. Her sister, Anastasia, loved 
playing the piano, singing, painting and drawing.
  On April 20, 2022, Natalia lost her sister, Anastasia, to fentanyl 
poisoning. She purchased what she thought was Percocet marketed by a 
dealer. Those pills turned out to contain fentanyl.
  Anastasia was 15 years old.
  The Devin Norring Foundation, in partnership with Natalia, produced 
an impactful and heartfelt PSA to fight back against fentanyl. In 
turning her grief into activism, Natalia has shown strength and courage 
beyond her years. I am proud to have her as an ally in this fight 
against the fentanyl crisis.
  I thank Natalia for sharing Anastasias story and demonstrating a 
commitment to combating the opioid crisis.
I rise today to honor Sophia Soriano, who 
worked in partnership with her peers to put together a Fight Back 
Against Fentanyl PSA.
  Sophia is from St. Paul, Minnesota. She has proven her commitment to 
combating the opioid crisis through her advocacy and work with the 
Devin Norring Foundation. The Devin Norring Foundation was established 
to honor Devins legacy and raise awareness about the dangers of 
illicit drugs and fentanyl.
  On April 4, 2020, Devin passed away from fentanyl poisoning. He was 
seeking relief from blackout migraines and dental pain. He bought what 
he thought was Percocet marketed by a drug dealer on Snapchat. That 
pill turned out to be 100 percent fentanyl.
  Devin was 19 years old.
  The Devin Norring Foundation, in partnership with Sophia, produced an 
impactful and heartfelt PSA to fight back against fentanyl. In turning 
grief into activism, Sophia has shown strength and courage beyond her 
years. I am proud to have her as an ally in this fight against the 
fentanyl crisis.
  I thank Sophia for demonstrating a commitment to combating the opioid 
crisis.
I rise today to honor the 100th 
anniversary of the San Francisco Bay Chapter of the Sierra Club, and 
their continued dedication to conservation and environmental action and 
advocacy in the Bay Area.
  The Sierra Club was originally founded in 1892, and the San Francisco 
Bay Chapter was established in 1924, including Alameda, San Francisco, 
Contra Costa, Marin, and San Mateo counties.
  Since its founding in 1924, the San Francisco Bay Chapter of the 
Sierra Club has persisted in its mission to advance conservation and 
environmental action in the San Francisco Bay Area and beyond. 
Throughout their history, the chapter has advocated for the 
preservation of natural landscapes, the protection of wildlife 
habitats, and the promotion of sustainability in public policy. Now in 
2024, the Sierra Club continues its work to be a leader of climate 
action and environmental justice.
  Early accomplishments of the Bay Chapter include supporting the 
creation of Mt. Tamalpais State Park and the East Bay Regional Park 
District, a system of parks and trails throughout Alameda and Contra 
Costa counties. In the decades that followed, the chapter played a key 
role in the creation of landmark legislation such as the Wilderness Act 
of 1964, the Save the Bay movement of the mid-60s, and the creation of 
McLaughlin Eastshore State Park in Berkeley, California.
  In more recent years, the Bay Chapter has focused on addressing 
pressing environmental challenges such as climate change and urban 
sprawl. Through grassroots organizing, advocacy campaigns, and 
community outreach, the Sierra Club has worked to promote renewable 
energy, reduce greenhouse gas emissions, and advocate for sustainable 
land use policies. The Bay Chapter balances its important campaign 
priorities with a love of the outdoors, encouraging community members 
to experience the outdoors for themselves through one of their vibrant 
activity groups.
  The Bay Chapters commitment to environmental justice and equitable 
access to nature is a central part of its mission. From tree-planting 
campaigns in Oakland to passing Climate Literacy resolutions in local 
school districts, the Sierra Club aims to create a Bay Area where the 
outdoors and healthy, livable communities are available to all.
  I honor the San Francisco Bay Chapter of the Sierra Club for a 
century of environmental advocacy and critical service to our 
community. Their legacy of leadership and commitment to action will 
inspire positive change in Californias 12th Congressional District and 
beyond for years to come. Heres to many more years of inspiring 
dedication to exploring, enjoying, and protecting our environment.
I rise to pay tribute to an exemplary 
staff member of the House Committee on Appropriations, Mr. Walter 
Hearne, as he retires from Federal Government service this year.
  For twenty-five years, Walter has served the U.S. Congress with 
distinction. He began his career in 1999 as a Staff Assistant with the 
Senate Budget Committee where he developed an affinity for the federal 
budget process. In 2002, he transitioned to the U.S. House of 
Representatives, and the House Committee on Appropriations, where he 
served for several years as professional staff on the Subcommittee on 
Treasury, Postal Service, and General Government and the Subcommittee 
on Transportation and the Treasury.
  In 2004, Walter began working on funding our national security when 
he joined the Subcommittee on Military Construction and Veterans 
Affairs. For seven years, Walter worked to pass annual appropriations 
bills that improved the quality of life for service members and their 
families including improvements in medical care, housing, and child 
development centers. At the height of the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, 
Walter also worked to pass several supplemental appropriations bills in 
support of ongoing military operations in the U.S. Central Command area 
of responsibility.
  In 2011, Walter brought his national security and appropriations 
experience to the Subcommittee on Defense, where he would work for the 
next fourteen years. On the Subcommittee, Walter primarily served as 
the professional staff member in charge of the Air Force portfolio. He 
worked on programs of tremendous national security importance like the 
modernization of Americas nuclear triad, the F-35 Joint Strike 
Fighter, the KC-46 tanker, and Intelligence Community programs. 
Ultimately, Walter would assist in shepherding fifteen appropriations 
bills through Congress while serving as staff on the Subcommittee on 
Defense.
  In the 117th Congress, I was honored to serve as the Chair of the 
Defense Subcommittee during a particularly tumultuous time in Americas 
national security. This Congress included the COVID-19 pandemic, the 
end of the War in Afghanistan, and the beginning of Russias full-scale 
invasion of Ukraine. I was able to be successful as Chair during the 
117th Congress because of the incredible Subcommittee staff serving 
with me, Walter chief among him. As Chair, I knew I could always count 
on Walters utmost professionalism, deep wealth of knowledge, and his 
best counsel, which he has always provided to Clerks and Chairs of the 
Subcommittee from both parties. His work and was critical to helping me 
enact the Fiscal Year 2022 and Fiscal Year 2023 Defense Appropriation 
Acts, and I will always be grateful to him for his work.
, I am proud to join my colleagues in recognizing Walter 
Hearnes achievements over 25 years working in Congress and his record 
of incredible service to our Nation. I wish him all the best in the 
years to come.
Colorado native Jennifer Jaime is a testament 
and great example of the hardworking students Colorado has to offer. 
She is a first-generation student from metro Denver, and enrolled in CU 
Denver in 2017, and participated in the Marc U-Star Program--a 
scholarship program for students interested research careers and plan 
in pursuing their Ph.Ds in behavioral and biomedical sciences. Through 
the MARC U-program Jennifer participated in a summer research program 
at Princeton University.
  She graduated in 2019 with a BA in psychology and was admitted to the 
University of Michigans competitive Neuroscience Graduate Program for 
her doctorate. Jaime received her PhD in May 2024 and has chosen to 
return to Colorado for her post graduate work at CU Anschutz where she 
started her post-doctoral fellowship in August 2024.
  It is my distinct privilege as the United States Representative of 
the 4th District of Colorado to congratulate Jennifer for her hard work 
in achieving this accomplishment and Im so glad she chose to return 
home to Colorado. Welcome home to Jennifer, and I thank her for her 
example and the research she is doing.
-DeREMER. Mr. Speaker, I was attending a funeral of a 
family friend this weekend, and my flight back to DC on Monday was 
severely delayed due to maintenance, causing me to miss the vote 
series. Had I been present, I would have voted YEA on Roll Call No. 
440; YEA on Roll Call No. 441; and YEA on Roll Call No. 442.
I rise today to recognize and 
celebrate the exceptional work demonstrated by Shelly McLaren, who 
selflessly dedicates her life to ensuring individuals feel comfort 
following life-altering events across the State of Iowa and the United 
States. This remarkable woman demonstrates an exceptional volunteer 
commitment to serve our communities. As the team lead for the Iowa 
chapter of Crisis Response Canines (CRC), a national nonprofit that 
provides comfort visits and crisis response support following traumatic 
incidents, she has made an indelible mark on Iowa communities and 
beyond.
  Her dedication to rigorous training has earned both her and her 
canine partner, Jacks, the highest certifications. Embracing the credo 
``Purpose Beyond Oneself, she is committed to selflessly caring for 
those experiencing life-altering traumatic events.
  She consistently shows an unparalleled ability to mobilize swiftly in 
response to crises, coordinating with operations leaders to support 
those impacted by critical incidents. During these interactions, she 
and Jacks bring their healing, compassionate presence to individuals 
enduring the most traumatic events of their lives. Their deployments 
include responding to the January 4, 2024, shooting in Perry, Iowa; 
assisting in Minden and Greenfield, Iowa, following spring 2024 
tornadoes; and most recently, aiding multiple counties in northwestern 
Iowa after severe storms and flooding.
  When not responding to tragic events, she and Jacks are a well-known 
and respected team, visiting community organizations and attending 
special events.
  Her work has inspired others to join, creating a ripple effect that 
strengthens the communitys ability to respond to crises effectively. 
The countless lives touched by her compassion and dedication serve as a 
testament to the lasting impact of her volunteerism.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in celebrating this 
remarkable woman and Jacks for their service to the State of Iowa and 
the Third Congressional District.
today I rise to recognize the Honorable 
Geanie W. Morrison, whose extraordinary 26-year career of public 
service to the Crossroads region and the state of Texas is coming to a 
close. Throughout her 13-term career in the Texas Legislature, 
Representative Morrison has exemplified dedication, leadership, and a 
tireless commitment to improving the lives of all Texans.
  Since her election in 1999, Representative Morrison has represented 
Texas 30th District in the Texas House of Representatives which today 
includes DeWitt, Goliad, Jackson, Lavaca, Matagorda, Victoria counties. 
Over the course of her tenure, she has become a trusted leader in the 
Capitol and a steadfast advocate for her constituents.
  Representative Morrisons legislative record is filled with notable 
achievements, but one of her most profound and life-saving 
contributions is her authorship of the countrys first Safe Haven 
``Baby Moses law, passed in 1999. This legislation provides a 
compassionate and responsible alternative for desperate mothers who may 
otherwise feel they have no choice but to abandon their newborns. 
Through the Safe Haven law, mothers are given the option to safely and 
legally surrender their babies at designated locations, such as 
hospitals or fire stations, without fear of prosecution.
  This law has had an immeasurable impact on saving lives. Since its 
passage, hundreds of newborns across Texas have been safely 
surrendered, and all 50 states have since implemented similar measures. 
Thanks to Representative Morrisons initiative, countless lives have 
been saved and will continue to be.

  Her work in higher education has been impactful to Texas as well. As 
Chair of the House Committee on Higher Education, she played a pivotal 
role in the expansion of the University of Houston-Victoria into a 
four-year institution, significantly increasing access to higher 
education for students in the region. Her efforts have been recognized 
by many, including the Texas Higher Education Coordinating Board, which 
awarded her the Leadership Star Award. She has also been named 
Legislator of the Year by the Texas Association of Student Financial 
Aid Administrators and honored with the Texas Community College 
Teachers Association Legislator of the Year Award.
  Beyond her legislative work, Representative Morrison has always been 
deeply committed to community service. Her 17-year involvement with the 
Junior League of Victoria allowed her to lead programs like ``Making 
the Grade and ``Great Expectations, where she worked with young 
people to inspire academic success and provide support for pregnant 
teens in completing their education. Her leadership in these 
initiatives has touched countless lives and opened doors of opportunity 
for those who need it most.
  Representative Morrisons service extended beyond her district and 
into key leadership positions at the state level. Prior to running for 
office, she served as Executive Director of the Governors Commission 
for Women under Governor George W. Bush, and she was appointed to the 
Texas Commission for Volunteerism and Community Service and the Texas 
Juvenile Probation Commission.
  Her long-standing dedication to public service has earned her 
numerous awards, including the Boy Scouts of America South Texas 
Councils Distinguished Citizen Award, the Victoria Chamber of Commerce 
Outstanding Citizen of the Year Award, and recognition as one of South 
Texas Women of the Year. These accolades are a testament to her 
unwavering commitment to her constituents and her deep-rooted belief in 
the importance of community involvement.
  As Representative Morrison embarks on this new chapter of her life, 
it is my honor to recognize her remarkable career and thank her for her 
faithful service to Texas. We are better off having had someone of 
Geanies caliber involved in public service. May God bless her and her 
family in the days and years ahead.
I rise to honor and remember a very 
special Alaskan.
  On August 25th, a devastating landslide in Ketchikan destroyed homes 
and took a fellow Alaskan from us. That Alaskan was Sean Griffin. Sean 
was a selfless husband, father, son, neighbor, and public servant. 
Ketchikan families knew him for his positive spirit and his devotion to 
his friends, family, and community. At the time of the landslide, Sean, 
a senior maintenance technician for the city, was clearing stormwater 
drains on his day off.
  Its heartbreaking to see that such a model Alaskan and public 
servant is now gone from our Ketchikan community. He will be so deeply 
missed.
  Earlier this month, I witnessed the landslide damage in Ketchikan 
firsthand. It was horrific. Alaskans had their entire lives uprooted.
  Our delegation will be working closely with those affected to make 
sure Ketchikan is safe. But Sean was taken from us too soon. I am 
sharing my deepest condolences to his friends, family and all those 
whose lives he touched. May he rest in peace.