I rise today to honor South Floridas 
first responders as they are celebrated at the fourth annual Blue Mass 
at Assumption Catholic Church taking place in Floridas 23rd 
Congressional District on November 15, 2023.
  Today and every day, Americas first responders remain on alert and 
on call whenever we need them. Putting themselves at great personal 
risk. They are our police officers and sheriffs deputies protecting 
our communities. They are our firefighters running into burning 
buildings or emergency medical technicians, paramedics, 911 dispatchers 
and other public health workers providing emergency cases. There are 
not enough words to explain how grateful we are to all our 
extraordinary brave men and women who put themselves in harms way each 
day, to keep our Nation safe.
, it is with great appreciation that I ask my colleagues 
to join me in honoring our first responders for their service and 
sacrifice to our communities. We owe them a great debt of gratitude.
St. Louis and I rise with great honor to 
recognize Better Family Life on the occasion of their 40th anniversary. 
Endurance, faith, and unwavering commitment to service have been the 
cornerstones of their remarkable journey, shaping the lives of 
countless individuals and families across the St. Louis region.
  Better Family Lifes workforce development programs have provided 
community members with vital job skills while fostering economic 
empowerment and stability. Their unwavering commitment to youth, 
family, and clinical services has created a nurturing environment for 
the growth and well-being of young people.
  While Better Family Lifes journey began in the basement of their 
founders home, it has since grown into a formidable organization, 
marked by significant milestones and achievements. The Better Family 
Life Cultural Education Center enriches our understanding of the 
African Diaspora through Afrikan Dance, artistic traditions classes, 
and the largest area Kwanzaa expo. The Business Center and Melanated 
Marketplace stands as a testament to the organizations dedication and 
impact, serving as a hub for Black education, small business 
empowerment, and community engagement.
  As Congresswoman for Missouris First District, I am proud of the 
various ways my office has been able to support Better Family Lifes 
mission, including by securing $3 million in congressionally directed 
federal funding for the Lifehouse Phase 1 initiative to help revitalize 
North City and support residents in securing homes. This funding is 
vital to sustaining the economic vibrancy of North City, and it was an 
honor to partner with Better Family Life to deliver meaningful federal 
resources for initiatives that will benefit residents across the 
district for years to come.
  As Better Family Life celebrates this momentous milestone, I extend 
my deepest appreciation for their unwavering dedication and 
congratulate them on the tremendous impact they have had on our St. 
Louis community over the past four decades.
I rise today to congratulate West Point 
implement on a half-century of doing business.
  Fifty years ago, Buddy Ternus, Francis Sand, and Erv Eisenmenger 
started this business that has grown significantly and evolved to meet 
the needs of the community through the years.
  Today, Erv and his sons Scott and Chad run West Point Implement as a 
family business.
  Over the past five decades, the business has expanded to include West 
Point Design and EIS, Mfg.
  One of the keys to their success has been their commitment ``to stay 
alert to change, and to lead the way for our employees and our 
customers toward being the best in the business of production 
agriculture.
  Cuming County, which is home to West Point Implement, has over 
360,000 acres of farmland and is one of the top counties for cattle in 
Nebraska.
  Consequently, West Point Implement has played a pivotal part in 
helping the ag economy grow in Cuming County in its years of business.
  Congratulations to West Point Implement and the Eisenmenger family on 
reaching this milestone--heres to the next fifty years.
November 10, marked the 5-year anniversary 
of the passing of a beloved friend and colleague, former House 
Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence Staff Director, Damon 
Nelson.
  Damon Nelson served his country nearly his entire life. Before 
working for Rep. Devin Nunes and the people of Californias 22nd 
Congressional District, Damon was proud to have served in the United 
States Air Force, where he met the love of his life and future wife, 
Brigadier General Dana Nelson. He was a decorated veteran of the 
Persian gulf war, earning an Air Medal and three Air Achievement 
Medals.
  Damon was known to be an immensely loyal colleague. He worked in the 
office of former Intelligence Committee Chairman Devin Nunes for over 
10 years. Five years after his passing, Members and staff alike 
remember Damon for his hard work, boundless sense of humor, selfless 
commitment to mentoring others and service to the intelligence 
community and his country.
I rise today to honor Cris Edwards of Olney, 
Illinois, for being named a National Distinguished Principal by the 
National Association of Elementary School Principals.
  Cris is the principal for Richland County Elementary School, which 
serves nearly 1,000 rural students. The elementary schools mission is 
to ``develop respectful, responsible learners and leaders. Under Cris 
Edwards watch, that mission is being fulfilled.
  Her devotion is recognized by students, parents, and teachers alike.
  The school was given the high honor of ``Legacy School by the 
Leader in Me program. They host ``High Five Fridays to build 
connections in the community. And they launched a mobile library in an 
old school bus to deliver books in the summer.
  Cris has earned her status as a National Distinguished Principal, 
just as she has earned her new position as the incoming president of 
the Illinois Principals Association.
, please join me in recognizing Cris Edwards for all she 
has done to provide a positive learning environment for Richland County 
schoolchildren.
today, I rise to honor Linda Kay Mitrovich, 
a beloved friend, leader and mentor.
  Linda was born on May 18, 1947, in Whittier. California. She was a 
dedicated public servant. She served on the Poway City Council and was 
.
  She committed her life to the betterment of others and took on many 
important causes, including environmental protection and Native 
American sovereignty.
  She played a significant role in creating the first Wildlife Corridor 
in California. the Coal Canyon Wildlife Reserve, which supported the 
ecological well-being of over twenty-two million people in Southern 
California. Linda also created the first national conference on Native 
American Sovereignty in 2000.
  The California State Legislature also recognized her accomplishments 
by naming her Woman of the Year in 1988 and 1991.
  Lindas legacy is remembered through her husband and five children, 
and her memory is cherished by those fortunate enough to have met her.
I rise today to celebrate a Crystal Lake, 
Illinois native, Lorraine Egan, for her service in the United States 
Navy.
  Following the unprovoked attack on Pearl Harbor in 1941, Lorraine 
proclaimed that she would be ``joining the Navy, following in the 
footsteps of her father who had served in WWI. On December 8, just the 
day after the attack, her father took her to the Navys recruitment 
center. Lorraine entered the Navy as part of the Women Accepted for 
Volunteer Emergency Service (WAVES) program, and in her words ``learned 
to be tough in a gentle way, which she said was necessary to push 
back against some of the men who were less supportive of women being in 
the military. She was among the first 200 women to join the Navy.
  The Navy sent Lorraine to Hunter College in New York where she 
attended nursing school before being sent to complete basic training at 
Naval Station Great Lakes in Lake County, Illinois. Lorraine was then 
deployed to Camp Lejeune in North Carolina and was involved in 
surgeries and delivering babies, parts of the job she loved the most. 
Her daughter notes that Lorraine enjoyed almost every aspect of the 
job, recalling that ``she just loved all the work.
  Former service members call her an inspiration. as not only did she 
have to pave the path for women to join the military, but ``she had to 
figure out the path  . . and bring the stones. At 101 years old, 
Lorraine encourages young women she meets to join the military as it 
pays for their education, instills a strong work ethic, and teaches 
people to be thoughtful and care about others.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in celebrating Lorraine 
Egan for her service to this country, and her bravery to trailblaze a 
path for women to serve our Nation. I offer her good health and the 
hope that she continues to spread the lessons she has learned over her 
life.
I rise to honor our Texas-24 Hometown 
Hero, Southlake Carrolls Water Polo Team, the Lady Dragons.
  In only their second year as a UIL program, the Southlake Carroll 
Lady Dragons Water Polo team has already achieved back-to-back 
appearances at the UIL 6A state tournament. This year, they took 2nd 
place at the State Championships.
  The Lady Dragons finished their 2023 season as District Champions, 
Regional Champions, and State Runner-Up, achieving a 23-2 overall 
record for the season.
  Congratulations to the Southlake Carroll Lady Dragons Water Polo team 
on an amazing season and all of their accomplishments. I look forward 
to cheering them on next season and wish all graduating seniors the 
best of luck.
I rise today to introduce the Fostering 
Family Cohesion Nationwide Act. The legislation makes Temporary 
Assistance for Needy Families (TANF), child support enforcement, and 
foster care programs available everywhere else in our Nation also 
available in the Northern Mariana Islands.
  My district is the only jurisdiction ineligible for such programs 
under Title IV of the Social Security Act. In every other part of the 
United States, these programs help low-income families with children 
achieve economic self-sufficiency, promote joint parental 
responsibility, and provide safe foster care placements for children 
who cannot remain in their homes.
  The continued exclusion of our islands is not only inequitable, but 
also violates the agreement negotiated in the covenant that established 
the current political relationship between the Marianas and the United 
States. Section 703 of P.L. 94-241 provides that the United States will 
make available to the Marianas the full range of federal programs and 
services available to the other territories. And by failing to remedy 
the Marianas exclusion from programs under Title IV, Congress is 
reneging on its promise and perpetuating the unequal treatment of 
Americans residing in U.S. territories.
  My bill, the Fostering Family Cohesion Nationwide Act, makes this 
long overdue correction, and upholds our nations statutory obligation 
to the people of the Marianas. Each childs right to a safe, nurturing, 
and permanent family must be safeguarded no matter where they grow up 
in the United States.
  I thank my colleagues who joined me in introducing this bipartisan 
legislation--Mr. Moylan, Ms. Radewagen, Ms. Plaskett, and Mr. Case.
today I am pleased to introduce the 
WyEast Tribal Resources Restoration Act, which establishes a first-in-
the-nation tribal co-management structure on the Mount Hood National 
Forest.
  This bill directs the Forest Service to enter into a Memorandum of 
Understanding (MOU) with the Confederated Tribes of the Warm Springs to 
protect and enhance Treaty resources within ``Indian Treaty Resources 
Emphasis Zones, through a co-management structure. The establishment 
of such Zones will help meet the trust responsibilities of the United 
States in protecting the exercise of Tribal Treaty rights and integrate 
indigenous ecological knowledge as an important part of the best 
available scientific information used to manage land within the Zones. 
The co-management plan will be developed with public input, subject to 
all existing environmental laws and regulations, including the National 
Environmental Policy Act. The bill also requires implementation of the 
Cultural Foods Obligations, which were included in the Public Lands 
Management Act of 2009 but have never been implemented.
  The federal government forced Native Americans off of their homelands 
and onto reservations, and we havent honored our promises for their 
treaty resources. I believe this tribal co-stewardship is an incredibly 
important step forward. It represents 21st century public lands 
management and Im proud to lead the effort. It also helps the federal 
government fulfill its treaty obligations to Native American 
communities--a moral obligation that the federal government has never 
truly fulfilled.
  I urge my colleagues to support this legislation, which will return 
some land management authority to Native Americans who have lived on, 
and managed, this land since time immemorial.
I rise today to join my Sikh friends in 
Pennsylvania and around the world to recognize the 39th anniversary of 
November 1984 anti-Sikh violence in India. November 1984 marks one of 
the darkest chapters in modern Sikh history. Sikhism traces its nearly 
600 years of history to the Punjab region of India. The Sikh community 
has a rich history in our country, with emigration dating back 100 
years. With nearly 30 million followers globally and a thriving 
community here in the United States, Sikhism is one of the worlds 
major religions.
  Today we are here to remember the violence which occurred in November 
1984, after the assassination of Indian Prime Minister Indira Gandhi in 
the capital territory of Delhi and most major cities of India. These 
killings lasted for days, and it is estimated that thousands of Sikh 
men, women, and children were brutally murdered in their homes and on 
the streets. Mr. Speaker, as a proud co-chair of the Congressional Sikh 
Caucus, remembering this heartbreaking violence that targeted Sikhs 
across India in 1984 is an important and historic step towards justice, 
accountability, and reconciliation and to prevent future such 
occurrences.
it is my honor to recognize the Benzie Area 
Christian Neighbors (BACN) for 40 years of dedicated service and 
charity. BACN serves as an inspiration to the community, standing by 
their mission of improving the quality of life for others and lending a 
hand to those in need.
  Founded in 1983, BACN has since performed an integral role in the 
Benzie Area. The group provides direct, needs-based assistance to those 
in the area who desperately require it. If BACN cant provide the 
support necessary themselves, they always assist with a referral to 
those who can. Over the years as BACN grew, it began to transform from 
a growing charity to a vibrant organization of faithful people working 
to better our society.
  For 40 years, the list of services that BACN offers has expanded 
substantially. Today, BACN is proud to provide a stocked food pantry, a 
large clothing center, adult education opportunities, financial 
assistance and so much more. BACN also partners with larger 
philanthropic entities in order to extend the best possible services to 
the Northern Michigan community. Through their collaborative efforts, 
no one who seeks help is turned away empty handed.
  The spirit of selflessness and compassion which characterizes BACN is 
what makes it special. Dedicated volunteers fill many crucial roles 
within the BACN network, serving as coordinators, organizers, and staff 
in all of the different locales of service. Their commitment and 
support have kept BACN running efficiently these past 40 years.
, it is my honor to congratulate the Benzie Area Christian 
Neighbors for 40 outstanding years of service to the Benzie community. 
Id like to thank BACN for their continued outreach and charitable 
programs, and I wish them the best in their future endeavors.
Title IV of Senate Resolution 4, agreed to by the Senate of February 
4, 1977, calls for establishment of a system for a computerized 
schedule of all meetings and hearings of Senate committees, 
subcommittees, joint committees, and committees of conference. This 
title requires all such committees to notify the Office of the Senate 
Daily Digest--designated by the Rules Committee--of the time, place and 
purpose of the meetings, when scheduled and any cancellations or 
changes in the meetings as they occur.
  As an additional procedure along with the computerization of this 
information, the Office of the Senate Daily Digest will prepare this 
information for printing in the Extensions of Remarks section of the 
Congressional Record on Monday and Wednesday of each week.
  Meetings scheduled for Thursday, November 16, 2023 may be found in 
the Daily Digest of todays Record.
I rise today to recognize and celebrate a 
dedicated educator and public servant, Mayor Gregory J. Zilka, who will 
be retiring after twelve years as Mayor of the City of Avon Lake. Over 
the course of his career, Mayor Zilkas commitment and leadership to 
Avon Lake has shaped it into the city it is today.
  Prior to serving as Mayor of Avon Lake, Mayor Zilka worked as a 
social studies teacher at Avon Lake High School for thirty-five years. 
In 1985, he was appointed to the Avon Lake City Council where he served 
for twenty-six years, fourteen of which he served as President.
  Mayor Zilka was first elected mayor in 2012. Since then, he has 
performed over 200 weddings, applied for and received $4,000,000 in 
grants on behalf of the city, oversaw the construction of 600 new 
single-family dwellings, and saw the population of Avon Lake grow by 
over 3,000 people. Mayor Zilka also saw Avon Lake through many 
complicated issues, including the potential closing of the Ford Ohio 
Assembly Plant. In the end, the company remained open and announced a 
$1.5 billion expansion. To help Avon Lake gain more access to Lake 
Erie, the Mayor oversaw the closing of Avon Lake Power Plant which had 
dominated the shoreline and skyline for 100 years. Mayor Zilka has also 
helped organize and participated in Avon Lakes year-long Bicentennial 
celebrations which brought about the first beer festival as well as 
other events for Avon Lakes citizens.
  Mayor Zilka has also been an active volunteer throughout his entire 
life. In his early 20s, he served in the Peace Corps, where he met his 
wife of forty-five years. For the past fourteen years, he has been 
active within the Lorain County Office on Agings Home Delivered Meals 
program. Additionally, he volunteers weekly for Big Brothers/Big 
Sisters of Lorain County and has served on the board of trustees for 
organizations including the Lorain County Alcohol and Drug Addiction 
Services (ADAS), Cleveland State Leadership Academy, and the Cleveland 
Clinic Avon Hospital Advisory Council, among many others.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in paying special tribute 
to Mayor Gregory J. Zilka of Avon Lake, Ohio. On behalf of the people 
of the Fifth Congressional District of Ohio, I recognize the dedication 
and leadership that Mayor Zilka has shown through his service to his 
community. We wish him all the best in his future endeavors.