I rise today to honor the Alabama Mountain 
Lakes Tourist Association on the occasion of its 60th anniversary. For 
six decades, this organization has been a steadfast advocate for 
tourism in the North Alabama region, significantly contributing to the 
economic vitality and cultural richness of our state.
  Founded in 1964, the Alabama Mountain Lakes Tourist Association was 
established with the vision of promoting the diverse and breathtaking 
landscapes of North Alabama, which range from the majestic Appalachian 
Mountains in the east to serene lakes and vibrant vistas in the west. 
Over the years, Alabama Mountain Lakes has been instrumental in 
showcasing the natural beauty, historical landmarks, and unique 
attractions that make this region a cherished destination for tourists 
from across the Nation and around the world.
  Under the dedicated leadership of its board and staff, Alabama 
Mountain Lakes has successfully partnered with local businesses, 
governments, and communities to enhance tourism infrastructure, support 
local economies, and preserve the regions natural and cultural 
heritage. The Associations innovative marketing campaigns, educational 
initiatives, and community engagement efforts have not only attracted 
countless visitors but have also fostered a deep sense of pride among 
residents.
  The Alabama Mountain Lakes Tourist Association is committed to 
sharing with the rest of Alabama, the South, and the nation the great 
attractions, festivals, restaurants, and other entertainment options 
that North Alabama has to offer. From the W.C. Handy Music Festival in 
Florence to the Christkindlmarkt in Cullman, to the Worlds Longest 
Yardsale in DeKalb County, there is something for everyone.
  As we celebrate this remarkable milestone, I would like to extend my 
heartfelt congratulations to the Alabama Mountain Lakes Tourist 
Association for 60 years of outstanding service. Their tireless efforts 
have left an indelible mark on our state, and I am confident that they 
will continue to inspire and lead in the years to come.
  Mr, Speaker, please join me in recognizing the Alabama Mountain Lakes 
Tourist Association for their exceptional contributions to the tourism 
industry and the lasting impact they have made on North Alabama and 
beyond.
I rise to recognize and celebrate Olympic 
Gold Medalist and wrestling champion Sarah Hildebrandt, who brought 
home the gold in the womens wrestling freestyle 50-kilograms event at 
the 2024 Summer Olympics in Paris, France.
  Growing up in Granger, Indiana, and a proud 2011 graduate of Penn 
High School where she wrestled all four years, Sarahs achievements in 
the sport of wrestling are almost too numerous to list. Prior to coming 
to Paris this summer, Sarah could claim being a two-time world bronze 
medalist, a two-time world silver medalist, and an Olympic bronze 
medalist from the Tokyo Summer Games as just a few of her many 
accolades. With her win over Cubas Yusneylis Guzman Lopez in the 50-
kilogram weight class womens freestyle final on August 7, 2024, Sarah 
is now also just the fourth woman to win gold in wrestling for Team USA 
in history.
  Upon winning the gold this summer, Sarah reflected, ``this gold medal 
is for everyone who has ever faced a setback or felt like giving up. 
Its proof that with hard work, determination, and a little bit of 
faith, anything is possible. Sarahs determination and persistence 
have inspired so many around the world, especially but not limited to 
those in the sport of wrestling.
  I have always found it fitting that the Summer Olympics take place in 
the same year as our U.S. presidential elections. While Americans are 
often divided politically, every four years the Summer Olympics afford 
us an opportunity to unite around our love of country and be united in 
pride and admiration for athletes like Sarah who represent our Nation 
on the world stage so well.
  I thank Sarah for bringing a healthy dose of Hoosier pride to Paris 
this summer. I congratulate her on her incredible athletic 
achievements, both at this summers Olympics and throughout her 
impressive, decorated career. I and so many others look forward to 
seeing what she will continue to accomplish going forward. May God 
bless.
it is an honor and privilege to recognize and 
celebrate the centennial anniversary of the City of Belle Isle in 
Central Florida. Once a Native American oasis, Belle Isle was founded 
by Central Floridians in 1924 to resist Orange Countys attempts to 
drain Lake Conway and its chain of lakes, which span approximately 
1,800 acres.
  Belle Isles first citizens and interim Mayor C.H. Hoffner 
unanimously voted on the citys name, which resembles the French phrase 
for ``beautiful island. Today, it reflects the citys peaceful, 
lakefront living that provides an escape from the nearby metros.
  In 1928, Belle Isle was annexed back into Orange County, and records 
of the City of Belle Isle ceased to exist. However, residents once 
again rallied against another attempt by the County to use the lakes 
for drainage in 1954, and the local government was reinstated. The 
State of Florida later recognized the City of Belle Isles charter in 
1972.
  The citys government ran continuously until the early 2000s when a 
council-manager form of government was adopted to better serve Belle 
Isle residents. Since that time, the city has flourished. Annexations, 
the establishment of a Belle Isle Police Department, and an agreement 
to open Cornerstone Charter Academy mark Belle Isles largest 
achievements in recent years.
  In celebration of Belle Isles centennial, the city will be hosting a 
Tree Recognition Ceremony to honor two of its beautiful trees. One tree 
will be recognized as a centennial tree, symbolizing 100 years of Belle 
Isle history. A second plaque will acknowledge a newly planted tree 
that will stand for the next 100 years. We wish good fortune to the 
City of Belle Isle and its residents and hope for another 100 years of 
history.
today I recognize a remarkable and 
historic milestone that unites two communities across the Atlantic 
Ocean. It is with great pride and joy that I announce the official 
designation of Old Forge, Pennsylvania, and Felitto, Italy, as sister 
cities. This designation not only honors our shared heritage but also 
strengthens the bond of friendship and cultural exchange between our 
two communities.
  Old Forge, situated in the heart of northeastern Pennsylvania, has 
long been a beacon of Italian-American culture. Known affectionately as 
the Pizza Capital of the World, Old Forge boasts a rich history that is 
deeply intertwined with the Italian immigrant experience.
  In the late 1800s and early 1900s, waves of immigrants from Felitto, 
a picturesque town in the Campania region of southern Italy, made their 
way to Old Forge, then known as Mudtown. Their arrival marked the 
beginning of a new chapter in the communitys history, bringing with 
them their traditions, values, and, of course, their beloved culinary 
heritage.
  Felitto, located in the province of Salerno, is renowned for its 
artisanal fusilli pasta and its vibrant annual celebration, the Fusillo 
Festival. This festival is a testament to Felittos commitment to 
family, community, and the joy of food. The towns dedication to 
preserving its cultural traditions and fostering a strong sense of 
community is mirrored in the spirit of Old Forge.
  The Felittese Association of Old Forge, now in its 35th year, hosts 
the citys annual Felittese Italian Festival on the second weekend in 
September in commemoration of Our Lady of Constantinople, who has been 
venerated in the town of Felitto since 1790. Much like Felittos 
Fusillo Festival, this annual celebration stands as a proud homage to 
Old Forges Italian roots by celebrating the rich tapestry of Italian 
culture through homecooked food and music with family, friends, and 
neighbors. It is a cherished tradition that underscores the deep 
connections that bind our two communities.
  The sister city designation between Old Forge and Felitto represents 
more than just a symbolic gesture; it is a recognition of the shared 
heritage and enduring ties that unite us. It honors the legacy of the 
Italian immigrants who contributed so profoundly to Old Forge, the 
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and the U.S. and acknowledges the vibrant 
culture that continues to thrive today.
  This partnership will strengthen economic ties and enhance the mutual 
understanding between our communities. It is a celebration of our 
shared history and a commitment to continuing the traditions that have 
enriched our lives and nations.
  As we commemorate this new chapter in the relationship between Old 
Forge and Felitto, let us honor the contributions of the Italian 
immigrants who helped shape our communities. Their legacy lives on in 
the vibrant celebrations, the delectable cuisine, and the strong sense 
of community that define both Old Forge and Felitto.
  As the Member of the U.S. House representing northeastern 
Pennsylvania, I extend my heartfelt congratulations on this historic 
achievement. May this sister city relationship continue to flourish, 
bringing us closer together.
I rise to honor Mrs. Kimberly Drew 
Wright, a vibrant member of the Chesterfield County community who 
touched countless lives through her passion for advocacy. Kim passed 
away on July 5, 2024, after a courageous battle with breast cancer.
  Kim was a talented author and entrepreneur, a determined advocate for 
social justice who inspired thousands of women to become leaders in 
their communities, and a beloved wife and mother. She formed and 
organized the Liberal Women of Chesterfield County &amp; Beyond (LWCC), 
inspiring change and fostering hope across the Commonwealth.
  Kim went above and beyond for her community. She, alongside LWCC, 
played a significant role in local, State, and national elections by 
encouraging more women in Chesterfield County to serve as volunteers, 
activists, and candidates for elected office. She also worked to ratify 
of the Equal Rights Amendment in Virginia in 2020, seeing our 
Commonwealth become the 38th State to ratify the amendment.
  Among many awards and accolades, Kim received the 2019 Newsmaker of 
the Year award from Virginia Professional Communicators for her 
achievements as the leader of LWCC and for sharing her vision, story, 
and impact with local, national, and international media. Based on her 
personal experiences with Pediatric Acute-onset Neuropsychiatric 
Syndrome (PANS), Kim also became an outspoken advocate for recognition, 
research, and treatment of this rare but potentially devastating 
condition, and she was a fierce champion for children affected by PANS 
and their families.
  Kim is the reason I am here today--serving Virginias Seventh 
District in the U.S. House of Representatives. Her dedication, passion, 
and love instilled a confidence in me and touched the hearts of so 
many. When she got sick, she demonstrated true strength and grace.
  I am honored to recognize my dear friend, Kim Wright. She will be 
greatly missed by her husband, children, friends, and all those who 
will remember her strength, courage, and pure humanity. Kims legacy 
will be felt in our communities for years to come.
, please join me in celebrating Mrs. Kimberly Drew Wright.
I rise today to celebrate the 
service of Colonel Constance C. Johnson-Cage, the Individual 
Mobilization Augmentee to the Director of Personnel in the Office of 
the Air Force Reserve. Colonel Johnson-Cage, a Kansas City resident, is 
retiring from the United States Air Force after more than 38 years of 
service.
  Colonel Johnson-Cages career has been marked by a distinguished 
commitment to our nations defense and security.
  This commitment began in 1985, when Colonel Johnson-Cage enlisted in 
the United States Air Force as an air cargo specialist. Since then, 
Colonel Johnson-Cage has held an impressive portfolio of leadership 
positions, including serving at the Secretary of the Air Force level 
and Headquarters Air Force level, and as a commander in the Air 
National Guard and Air Force Reserve.
  In her current position, Colonel Johnson-Cage assists in the 
oversight of Total Force policy development and guidance, prepares 
input for legislative initiatives and congressional testimony, and 
facilitates the integration of personnel policies across the Department 
of Defense. She also assists with the management and oversight of 
resources impacting a budget of nearly $450 million for accessions, 
recruiting, retention, education, training, force structure, 
compensation, and benefits impacting 360,000 reservists and their 
dependents worldwide.
  Her contributions have been recognized with an array of honors. Most 
notably, Colonel Johnson-Cage received a Defense Meritorious Service 
Medal, Air Force Meritorious Service Medal with three oak leaf 
clusters, Joint Service Commendation Medal, and an Air and Space 
Longevity Service Award with two oak leaf clusters.
  The Kansas City area is proud to have Colonel Johnson-Cage as a part 
of our community. As Colonel Johnson-Cage enters into her next chapter, 
I have no doubt she will continue to spread the spirit of dedication 
and service to country. I thank Colonel Johnson-Cage for her lifetime 
of public service and wish her a happy and fulfilling retirement.
I rise to honor one of my constituents who 
has been a valued member of our community here on Capitol Hill for the 
past quarter century: Mark Fritter from Anne Arundel County, Maryland. 
He is retiring after providing crucial technical support to numerous 
congressional offices over the past 25 years. We ought to give thanks 
for his many contributions to his community, his Congress, and his 
country.
  Mark is a bit of a kindred spirit. Like me, Mark was raised in Prince 
Georges County. He is also a fellow Terp, having earned his degree in 
marketing from the University of Maryland, College Park. He kicked off 
his career on Capitol Hill in 1999 as a consultant helping 
congressional staff use the customer relationship management (CRM) 
software ``Capitol Letters. Following a merger, he pivoted to 
consulting staff on how to use Intranet Quorum (IQ). Back then, 
computers were still a relatively new technology. Mark played a vital 
role in helping staff harness the power of these new tools and 
integrate these innovations into Congress day-today work.
  In the past 25 years, Mark provided invaluable support to hundreds of 
legislative coordinators, communications directors, and other top 
staff. He has taught communications professionals how to use IQs 
newsletter software to keep constituents informed and to expand Member 
offices subscriber base and digital reach. His work has helped Members 
engage more closely with the people they represent. Mark has been 
particularly adept at helping set up new Member offices on these 
technologies and has helped facilitate more than a dozen congressional 
transitions during his tenure on the Hill.
, Mark is one of the thousands of people who work 
tirelessly behind the scenes to help this Congress fulfill its 
responsibilities For the People. His commitment to service goes beyond 
his professional career, however. From supporting his local church to 
serving as Assistant Scoutmaster for Boy Scout Troop 403 based out of 
Bowie, Maryland. Mark has devoted much of his free time to giving back 
to his community. He has also been a tremendous husband to his wife, 
Rhonda, and father to their son, Ben. Crucially, I hear Mark has been 
an excellent owner to their dog, Pepper, and their two cats, Lilly and 
Zoe-Zoe.
  I know that many here on Capitol Hill and back in Maryland appreciate 
Marks warmth, good humor, and willingness to lend a hand. Mark may be 
moving to Indiana to be closer to family, but hell always be a 
Marylander at heart. It is a privilege to represent kind, generous, and 
hardworking people like Mark from Marylands Fifth District.
  I ask that all my colleagues join me in congratulating Mark on this 
milestone and in wishing him and his family all the best.
I would like to take a moment 
to recognize the incredible life and the amazing contributions of my 
friend Pat Smith, who passed away peacefully on August 17th. Tomorrow, 
September 7th there will be a ``Celebration of Life to honor and pay 
tribute to the remarkable Pat Smith.
  Pat Smiths extraordinary work for patients, caregivers, and Lyme-
literate doctors around the country has been transformational. An 
incredibly well-informed and tenacious leader, Pat fought effectively 
and relentlessly for greater diagnosis, treatments, and outcomes for 
Lyme patients.
  Because of Pat Smith, legislation to better meet the needs of Lyme 
patients is now the law of the land.
  I first met Pat in 1992 and from that moment on, my understanding, 
advocacy, and legislative work for Lyme patients--and frankly the work 
of this Chamber--was substantially and positively influenced. She was 
an outstanding collaborator. She did meticulous research and was 
painstakingly honest, reliable, and hardworking--often to the chagrin 
of the Lyme deniers.
  A widely respected straight shooter, Pat did not mince words as she 
and I worked together--along with other Lyme victims and family 
caregivers--calling on all public, medical, and insurance industry 
officials to be forthright and dedicated in fighting Lyme and saving 
lives.
  More than 30 years ago, Pat Smith came to one of my town hall 
meetings in Wall, New Jersey, and shared with me the plight of those 
suffering from chronic Lyme, including her two daughters.
  Shortly after, Pat and I sat down with the top leaders at the Centers 
for Disease Control and the National Institutes of Health, who were 
polite but highly dismissive of our concerns surrounding the 
recommended treatment for Lyme.
  Pat was brilliant in that meeting. She told them how CDCs 
``recommendation for prescribing up to a mere 1 months worth of 
antibiotics was being used by health insurance companies as the ceiling 
for what was covered. Even if the patient had Lyme for 5 years, only 1 
month of doxycycline was covered.
  The feds said it wasnt their intention to limit health insurance 
coverage, but they didnt fix the problem either.
  If you knew Pat, you knew that answer would not suffice.
  Already the founder and president of the Lyme Disease Association 
(LDA), Pat embarked on a personal and compassionate mission across the 
Nation to educate and help, spread awareness of this terrible disease, 
how to prevent it, and how to properly diagnose and treat it. She built 
synergistic coalitions around the country that worked relentlessly in 
support of Lyme research and to advance diagnosis and treatment for 
patients.
  Beyond the working coalitions, Pat organized 22 national, scientific 
conferences and shared her wealth of knowledge at hundreds of 
government, business, and school events.
  She provided both oral and written expert testimony in support of 
national and State laws and physicians right to fully treat Lyme in 
numerous States, including our own.
  When Pat brought her renowned expertise, passion, and admirable no-
nonsense demeanor to Washington, people listened.
  At my request, Pat testified before Congress and provided critical 
insights for substantive reform and Federal Lyme programs. And she 
skillfully made her case each year during the congressional 
appropriations process, ensuring that Lyme disease programs--and 
patients--finally got their due, or close to it.
  Pat also served two terms as a public member of the U.S. Department 
of Health and Human Services Tick-Borne Disease Working Group, a 
working group created by legislation she and I worked on together and 
helped shepherd into law.

  The working group reports, mandated by Congress, represent a true 
landmark in their far-reaching coverage of the persistent symptoms and 
persistent illness suffered by Lyme disease patients and the need for 
enhanced understanding of Lyme disease-associated chronic illness. And 
the reports referenced many published studies of chronic Lyme disease.
  The groundbreaking content of the working groups reports and their 
positive impact on Lyme patients and Lyme study are due in no small 
part to two term working group member Pat Smith.
  Under Pats leadership, LDA provided 127 research grants that have 
been acknowledged in 62 scientific journals.
  Working with author Amy Tan, she created LymeAid 4 Kids, a program 
that offers critical support to children with Lyme who come from 
families that face financial challenges. To date, this amazing 
initiative has provided more than $475,000 for diagnosis and treatment 
for children in need.
  Naturally inquisitive and loaded with ``street smarts, Pat also 
continued to study and probe the origins of Lyme and the impact defense 
bioweapons experiments on ticks may or may not have had on Lymes 
epidemic growth in the U.S.
  Pat Smiths unyielding commitment to improving the Federal response 
to Lyme disease has made a huge difference and has offered so much hope 
for Lyme patients across the country.
  She demanded fairness and honesty and never asked anybody to give 
more or do more than she and her husband, Rich, gave and did for the 
cause of conquering Lyme.
   I will greatly miss my good friend, Pat Smith, a trailblazer for 
Lyme disease patients. Pat and I share a birthday, a last name, and a 
thirst for justice for patients with Lyme. For Pat, and in her honor, 
our fight will continue.
HONORING THE LIFE AND LEGACY OF WICOMICO COUNTY SHERIFFS DEPUTY ROBERT 
                              of maryland
last week, I was sad to learn about the 
passing of retired Deputy Sheriff Robert T. Wilson of the Wicomico 
County Sheriffs Office. Deputy Wilson dedicated his life serving his 
community and country. A veteran of the U.S. Air Force, Bob served at 
the Eastern Correctional Institute before retiring from the Wicomico 
County Sheriffs Office in June of 2021.
  Deputy Wilson dedicated his life to helping others, putting his own 
life on the line to protect and serve the community he so much loved. A 
devoted member of the Fraternal Order of Police, Bob believed in 
service, sacrifice and honor. Robert T. Wilson passed away at the age 
of 71 years old.
  I would like to express my sincere condolences to his wife Esther, 
the Wilson family and the entire Wicomico County Sheriffs Office. The 
Eastern Shore is forever grateful for DFC Robert T. Wilson.
I rise today to honor Elbert Henry 
``Toughegg Knox, a courageous American who gave his life in service 
to our country during World War II. Elbert Knox first served as an Army 
cook from 1919 to 1920. In September 1941, at the age of 40, he 
answered the call again, leaving his home to work as a civilian 
contract worker on Wake Island in the Pacific Ocean. There, Knox and 
other civilians built essential facilities for the military, helping to 
defend the island during a fierce Japanese attack on December 8, 1941.
  Despite their valiant efforts, Wake Island fell to Japanese forces 
after a 15-day battle, and Knox became a prisoner of war. Transferred 
to Japan in September 1942, he faced brutal conditions--enduring abuse, 
starvation, solitary confinement, and exposure. Knoxs resilience was 
unwavering, but tragically, he died in captivity. After the war, his 
remains were laid to rest in the National Memorial Cemetery of the 
Pacific. In 1981, Knox and his fellow civilian contractors on Wake 
Island were granted veteran status.
  Today, I am proud to report that Mr. Knox has been posthumously 
awarded the Prisoner of War (POW) Medal and the Purple Heart. These 
medals will be presented to his family, who have waited decades to see 
his heroism formally recognized. His story is a powerful reminder of 
the price of liberty and the strength of the American spirit.
  I urge my colleagues to join me in paying tribute to Mr. Elbert Knox 
and extending our deepest gratitude to his family. May his legacy 
continue to inspire us all to serve our Nation with honor and 
dedication, and may we never forget his sacrifice.
as co-chair of the Congressional 
Sportsmens Caucus, I rise today to recognize an individual that has 
made significant contributions to our Nations fish and wildlife 
conservation efforts, as well as Americas longstanding outdoor 
traditions. This individual is also the recipient of an award named 
after members of this body that have made lasting and significant 
contributions to our Nations outdoor heritage.
  John ``Johnny L. Morris was born in Springfield, Missouri, to John 
A. and Genny Morris in 1948. Johnnys parents both loved to hunt and 
fish and soon shared their passions with their son. Johnnys love of 
fishing grew through high school and college but it wasnt until he 
attended the first national B.A.S.S. (Bass Anglers Sportsman Society) 
tournament that he truly realized his passion for fishing after meeting 
fishermen from all over the country.
  In 1972, Johnny Morris started selling tackle out of his dads Brown 
Derby Liquor Store, which became very popular for anglers visiting the 
areas waterways. In 1978, Morris created BASS TRACKER, the industrys 
first fully outfitted, ready-to-fish boat, motor, and trailer package, 
revolutionizing the entire outdoor industry and making it affordable 
for families to get out on the water and make memories that will last a 
lifetime.
  Today, Mr. Morris operates more than 170 Bass Pro Shops and Cabelas 
destinations across North America, and his commitment to his 
conservation roots remains stronger than ever as his company, for more 
than the past decade, has averaged giving back more than 10% of their 
earnings to conservation.
  Johnny would go on to then create the Johnny Morris Conservation 
Foundation, one of the most significant conservation foundations in 
North America. The not-for-profit foundation embodies Morris and his 
lifelong dedication to giving back to ensure the outdoors and all it 
has to offer is available for future generations. In conservation 
circles, Johnny Morris is often referred to as todays Modern-Day 
Theodore Roosevelt, as result of his leadership, personal commitment, 
and dedication to conservation efforts. A conservationist at heart, 
Johnny Morris recognized the need for citizens to become more involved 
in the careful management and use of our natural resources.
  Today, the foundation operates some of the Nations most significant 
conservation attractions, including Dogwood Canyon Nature Park, a 
10,000-acre-park that offers a variety of outdoor recreation. Its 
Conservation and Education Center is used to teach the importance of 
protecting and conserving our great outdoors. Most notably, the 
foundation also operates the most immersive conservation attraction in 
the world, Johnny Morris Wonders of Wildlife National Museum and 
Aquarium, where visitors are taken on a conservation journey through a 
350,000 square-foot complex of 35,000 live fish, mammals, reptiles, 
amphibians, and birds where they learn about wildlife habitat 
management and the significant contributions of Americas sportsmen and 
women. This attraction is also the official home of National Hunting 
and Fishing Day, which was launched by Congress in 1971 as a way to 
recognize and celebrate hunters and anglers for their leadership in 
wildlife and conservation.
  In recognition of Mr. Morris service to conservation, he has been 
chosen as this years recipient of the Dingell-Young Sportsmens Legacy 
Award, a fitting tribute to an individual whose life has epitomized 
dedication to Americas outdoor heritage.
  Named in recognition of the Dingell family--Congressmen John D. 
Dingell, Sr. and John D. Dingell, Jr. and the late Congressman Don 
Young, the Congressional Sportsmens Foundation created the Dingell-
Young Sportsmens Legacy Award to recognize the extraordinary 
individual and collaborative leadership of the Dingell family and 
Congressman Young and their long-standing dedication to the advancement 
of conservation policy and our outdoor hunting and angling traditions. 
Like them, Morris contributions to our outdoor traditions relied upon 
a unique commitment to a shared passion for hunting, fishing, and 
conservation.
  Recognized as one of the countrys leaders working to ensure natural 
habitats, wildlife, and the outdoors remain healthy and abundant for 
future generations, the Dingell-Young Sportsmens Legacy Award is a 
fitting tribute for Morris.
  In closing, I want to thank Mr. Morris for his many contributions to 
Americas outdoor heritage and congratulate him for the well-deserved 
recognition as the recipient of the Dingell-Young Sportsmens Legacy 
Award, the top award offered by the Congressional Sportsmens 
Foundation. In the words of Mr. Morris, Mr. Speaker, ``Take a kid 
fishing, youll be happy you did.
I rise today to recognize and celebrate 
the 30th anniversary of the Huron County Community Foundation. Since 
1994, this organization has been a cornerstone of meaningful change and 
community development throughout Huron County, which I am proud to 
represent in Congress.
  For three decades, the Huron County Community Foundation has made 
good on their mission to ``Invest FOR GOOD . . . FOR EVER. This motto 
has, without a doubt, fostered legacies that will shape Huron Countys 
future for years to come.
  The foundations impact covers a wide array of needs throughout our 
community, from healthcare to education and beyond. Through grants and 
other donations, the foundation has empowered countless families and 
organizations to succeed in their charitable goals. It goes without 
saying, but the amount of work that goes into an organization like this 
should be inspiring to us all. As we honor this milestone, it is 
important to recognize how the foundation--and all its beneficiaries--
have played a central role in nurturing Huron County. The very spirit 
of the foundation, coupled with their dedication to their community, 
has been central in guaranteeing a bright future.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in congratulating the 
Huron County Community Foundation on 30 years of outstanding service. I 
look forward to their continued success for many years to come.
I rise today to recognize and commend the 
exceptional bravery, skill, and determination of the United States 
Coast Guard units stationed along the Gulf Coast. These dedicated men 
and women came together in a large-scale Search and Rescue operation, 
resulting in the safe recovery of two scuba divers who had been 
separated from their dive vessel and lost at sea for nearly two days.
  On the morning of July 24th, the Sector Corpus Christi Command Center 
received a distress call reporting two divers missing more than 30 
miles offshore from Matagorda Texas and the Coast Guard immediately 
mobilized multiple assets.
  Leading this Search and Rescue effort was Lieutenant Commander Nina 
McDonald whose knowledge and experience helped coordinate the safe 
return of the divers. During the search, the Coast Guard faced severe 
weather and a vast search area. After hours without any luck, the 
aircrew of Coast Guard 2306 took over the search efforts. Despite 
daunting conditions, including reduced visibility, overcast skies, and 
hazardous flying through numerous cloud layers, this crew pressed on.
  After hours in the air, Petty Officer Nathan Cyrus, serving as a 
visual observer, spotted a faint flash of light on the water and the 
aircrew quickly maneuvered to the location where Petty Officer James 
Welzig, the dropmaster, prepared the aircraft for an aerial delivery of 
rescue equipment. Under the command of Lieutenant Brian Holcombe and 
Lieutenant Junior Grade Jake Pritchett, the aircrew helped guide the 
Coast Guard Cutter to the scene where the crew successfully located and 
rescued the two divers, who had endured 38 harrowing hours at sea.

  This remarkable rescue operation is a testament to the unparalleled 
excellence of our Coast Guard personnel. Their efforts in saving these 
lives reflect the highest standards of service and sacrifice.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in honoring these 
courageous men and women of the United States Coast Guard. Their 
actions over those intense 38 hours exemplify the very best of our 
Nations values, and we owe them our deepest gratitude.
I rise today to pay tribute to my first 
Congressional Chief of Staff, an early activist in the Civil Rights 
Movement, a life-long public servant, and my friend, Shirley Cooks, who 
passed on January 19, 2024. A celebration of life will be held for 
Shirley on Capitol Hill on September 12 with her family, friends and 
former co-workers gathering to honor a woman of substance, skill and 
humor who they considered a mentor and hero. Shirley ran my D.C. office 
with outstanding skill and loyalty, helping me, a first-term 
congressman, navigate a world she had known and managed relationships 
in for years. Her sage advice, deep knowledge, and constant grace were 
invaluable to me. A dedicated public servant all her life, Shirley was 
an ardent advocate of civil rights and had the achievements and life 
history to advance them. Shirley was born on August 27, 1944, to 
Melvine and William Wright in New York City. Her early education was 
divided between New York and Aboukir, St. Ann, Jamaica. Shirley 
graduated from St. Pauls School in Los Angeles in 1958. She became 
acquainted with leaders and staff members of both the Student 
Nonviolent Coordinating Committee (SNCC) and Southern Christian 
Leadership Conference (SCLC) when she moved from Los Angeles to New 
York to live with her brother and sister-in-law, entertainer and 
political activist Harry and his wife Julie Belafonte, and

their children. She studied at Bank Street College, a groundbreaking 
school advancing early childhood education; the New School for Social 
Research; and New York University during that time. By the mid-1960s, 
Shirley had moved to Atlanta to work full-time in the Civil Rights 
Movement as a member of the SNCC administrative staff with additional 
work on Voter Registration field projects in Alabama and Mississippi. 
Her work included liaison outreach with SCLC, where she met her future 
husband, Stoney Cooks. They were married in September 1970 and settled 
in Atlanta the following year. Shirley gave birth to her first child in 
1972, the year Andrew Young was elected to Congress, becoming the first 
African American representative from the Deep South since 
Reconstruction. Shirley worked in the principals office at Peabody 
Elementary School on Capitol Hill in Washington, D.C. in 1974 and gave 
birth to her second son in 1976. In 1977, when Andrew Young was 
appointed U.N. Ambassador by President Jimmy Carter, Shirley and Stoney 
and their two children moved to New York City where she worked at the 
African American Institute (AAI). In 1981, Shirley gave birth to her 
third son and the couple returned to Atlanta with their three children 
where she served in the position of Director, Bureau of Cultural 
Affairs, in the Parks and Recreation Department for the City of 
Atlanta. Continuing her work in public service, Shirley returned to 
work as Legislative Affairs Director at AAI in Washington, then served 
as Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Legislative Affairs at the 
U.S. Department of State under Secretary of State Madeleine Albright. 
She later worked as Chief of Staff for U.S. House Representatives 
members Juanita Millender-McDonald of California, Laura Richardson of 
California, and for me, before retiring. Shirley will be remembered as 
a devoted public servant with a wonderful sense of humor, a serious 
commitment to justice and good causes, her loyalty and her kindness. I 
extend my sincere condolences to her sons Caleb, Judah, and Micah; her 
grandchildren, Stoney Nakoda and Wiyot Adeline; and her many loyal 
friends and extended family members. May they take comfort in the life 
she lived. Shirley Cooks made a difference in our world and will 
continue to be greatly missed.