today I honor the 100th anniversary of the 
Marshall Street Armory, a historic landmark that has served as a vital 
cornerstone of the Lansing community.
  Since its opening in 1924, the Marshall Street Armory has played an 
important role in supporting our military through numerous conflicts 
and serving the people of Mid-Michigan.
  Originally home to the 119th Field Artillery Regiment of the Michigan 
National Guard, the armory was designed by Michigans first state 
architect, Lynn W. Fry, and stands as one of the earliest examples of 
Gothic-inspired military architecture in the state. For more than 80 
years, it housed Lansing-based National Guard units that contributed to 
the defense of our Nation in nearly every war during that period. The 
Marshall Street Armory was also the staging ground for Guard units 
providing aid during domestic crises and natural disasters, helping to 
protect our country and assist those in need.
  Beyond its military purpose, the armory became a gathering place for 
local residents. It hosted weddings, concerts, swap meets, boxing 
matches, and even circuses, cementing its place as a hub for social 
events and activities. Whether for celebrations or service, the 
Marshall Street Armory always brought people together in times of 
peace.
  After the 119th Field Artillery Regiment was decommissioned in 2007, 
the armory closed its doors as a military facility. In 2010, it was 
placed on the National Register of Historic Places, securing its legacy 
as an architectural and historical treasure.
  In 2012, following extensive renovations, the Marshall Street Armory 
reopened as a nonprofit collaboration center. Today, it houses several 
organizations, including Capital Area United Way, Big Brothers Big 
Sisters, and the Capital Region Community Foundation. It continues to 
serve the Greater Lansing area in a new capacity, providing essential 
services and strengthening the fabric of Mid-Michigan.
  As we celebrate the 100th anniversary of the Marshall Street Armory, 
let us honor both

its military heritage and its present role as a center of service and 
opportunity, filled with organizations dedicated to improving the lives 
of Lansing residents. It is with great appreciation and respect that I 
recognize the Marshall Street Armorys century of service.
it was my honor to pay tribute to Sergeant 
Andrew ``Tim Kiniry, a 102-year-old U.S. Army veteran who served his 
country gallantly on the shores of Normandy during World War II. 
Sergeant Kiniry performed one of the most courageous duties a solider 
can do by volunteering as a medic right on the front lines of one of 
Americas bloodiest battles. Not only did he charge bravely into battle 
with his unit, but he also simultaneously treated his fellow soldiers 
for injuries while under fire. Army medics were often the primary 
target on the battlefield, marked by the Red Cross for protection, but 
it ultimately led to increased fire by the Nazis. Tim, however, carried 
out his duties with bravery, applying tourniquets, bandaging wounds, 
and helping evacuate casualties to hospitals. This past year, he 
returned to Normandy to commemorate the 80th anniversary of D-Day and 
pay homage to all the fallen heroes. In the years following the war, 
Tim has devoted much of his time educating the youth of the atrocities 
that war brings, and he loves to remind me of the great quote ``Lest we 
forget. I thank Tim for all he has done for the United States. God 
bless Sergeant ``Tim and God bless the United States of America.
I rise to honor the life and service of 
El Dorado County Supervisor John Hidahl, who passed away on November 2, 
2024, at the age of 73.
  John Hidahl was born and raised in Californias Central Valley and 
graduated from Cal Poly, San Luis Obispo with a bachelors degree in 
mechanical engineering. Throughout his successful career, he worked at 
Aerojet for 31 years and Northrop Grumman for 10 years, where he filled 
various roles, such as a rocket test engineer, the director of 
engineering, and the chief systems manager. Coming from a farming 
family, Supervisor Hidahl was also the Chairman of Hidahl Ranch, where 
he helped manage the almond and walnut farm.
  Outside of his career success, Supervisor Hidahl tirelessly worked to 
improve the community around him. His motto of service before self is 
evident in the various areas where he volunteered and served his 
community. Among his many other roles in the El Dorado Hills community, 
he served for 33 years on the County Water District, 36 years on the 
Area Planning Advisory Committee, and 23 years on the Community 
Council.
  Supervisor Hidahl was elected twice to the El Dorado County Board of 
Supervisors, where he served as the District 1 Supervisor while 
advocating for a balanced budget, open space preservation, and housing 
options for seniors. Supervisor Hidahl was also engaged with his 
community outside of his formal roles, as he also actively supported 
the boy and girl scouts along with groups that serve the countys 
homeless population. In his spare time, Supervisor Hidahl enjoyed 
spending time with his family, traveling, and being outdoors.
  Supervisor Hidahl is survived by his wife Eileen, their five 
daughters, and their 10 grandchildren.
, Supervisor Hidahl was a devoted public servant who loved 
his country, his county, and his community. He will be deeply missed by 
all those who knew him. It is with a heavy heart that I rise today to 
honor his memory.
I was unable to cast my vote for H.R. 82, 
Social Security Fairness Act of 2023, due to air travel cancellations. 
As both a co-sponsor and a signer of the discharge petition that 
brought this bill to the floor, I am a strong supporter of eliminating 
the windfall elimination provision (WEP) and the government pension 
offset (GPO) that denies some retirees from receiving their full Social 
Security benefits.
  Had I been present, I would have voted YEA on Roll Call No. 456.
it was my honor to present the Quilt of 
Valor to Army veteran Sergeant Francis McArdle, in recognition of his 
great service to our country. Sgt. McArdle gave three years of his life 
to the United States by serving in the U.S. Army during one of the 
toughest times of American history, the Vietnam War. He served his 
country in a multitude of ways, first beginning with a special 
designation as a Forward Observer to the 101st Airborne Division with 
the 527th Artillery Unit. He then served as Communications Sergeant for 
Battery Company of the 527th Artillery before finishing his enlistment 
with the 1st Brigade, 1st Armored Division. Not everyone answers the 
call to defend our freedom, particularly during such a turbulent time 
for our country. Sgt. McArdle was one of those rare patriots that did, 
and it was my great honor that I was able to present him with the Quilt 
of Valor. May God bless Sgt. McArdle and God bless the United States of 
America.
on behalf of the Fourth 
Congressional District of Wisconsin, I would like to recognize the 
Arnwine Family for honoring their familys legacy of perseverance, 
activism, and dedication to create a more equal and just nation.
  Sterling Arnwines 1936 interview with the Federal Writers Project 
captured the unimaginable hardship and persecution of him and his 
family while enslaved. I am inspired by the story of Sterling Arnwine 
and the commitment of his descendants to share the stories of Black 
Americans who suffered under the violent institution of American 
slavery.
  The sharing of stories not only memorializes the many people who 
suffered but also gives voice to the survivors. I thank them for all 
they have done to benefit our communities. The Arnwine Family has 
touched the lives of many, and I look forward to seeing the continued 
impact and change their family creates in the years to come.
I rise today to acknowledge the 
contributions of ITA International LLC of Newport News, Virginia to the 
nation through their transition of Small Business Innovative Research 
(SBIR) developed technology to government and commercial use.
  Their approach is unique in that, first, they use commercial off the 
shelf products for the front- and back-end of the tool with the SBIR-
developed analytic algorithms ``in the middle. This approach 
significantly reduces the cost required to deliver solutions by 
leveraging existing government software licenses integrated with SBIR-
developed algorithms. Secondly, rather than providing a piece of 
software, they marry their data analytic algorithms with subject matter 
experts with profound understanding to provide unsurpassed service, 
that ITA refers to as ``technology enabled professional services, to 
their customers. Finally, they have a structured process for applying 
these algorithms, a proprietary approach based on agile development 
that ensures continuous interaction with the customer and iterative 
improvement of the tools and services they provide.
  ITA provides a shining example of the exact intent of the SBIR 
program. ITA leveraged federally funded research in Phase I and Phase 
II to develop data analytic algorithms and then applied those 
algorithms to solve government and industry problems in Phase III 
through innovative services. While their focus has been on the 
Department of Defense, customers across the federal government and in 
industry are seeing the benefit of the technology enabled professional 
services they provide,
  One example is how ITA has perfected and extended a SBIR tool 
(LOGCOP) using SBIR Phase III contracts over the years to provide 
advanced data analytic and artificial intelligence techniques or 
decision support tools. ITA continues to develop one of the resulting 
tools, called the Availability Management System (AMS), for the Navys 
Mid-Atlantic Regional Maintenance Center to better plan and execute 
surface ship maintenance periods. This tool has allowed the Navy to 
avoid hundreds of additional ship maintenance delay-days, improving 
readiness and diverting hundreds of millions of dollars to other 
critical purposes for a government investment a small fraction of that. 
AMS is being evaluated for broader use and integration into existing 
Navy decision support tools.
  On behalf of the 1st district of Virginia, I thank ITA for its 
service to our Nation, and I look forward to hearing about their future 
accomplishments.
I rise today to recognize 
the four Lower Snake River dams and the value they provide to Eastern 
Washington.
  The Columbia River System is the beating heart of the Pacific 
Northwest. This critical infrastructure helped transform our region 
from a dry, barren sage brush into one of the most productive 
agricultural regions in the world.
  It serves as a super-marine highway for farmers to ship their 
products all across America, while keeping thousands of trucks off the 
road every year. The dams along the Lower Snake River have strengthened 
our energy grid, lowered energy costs, and made us a leader in reducing 
carbon emissions.
  They help prevent life-threatening blackouts during extreme weather, 
not just in Washington state, but in California, Idaho, Oregon, 
Montana, and Wyoming. They also support a thriving tourism economy of 
small businesses and protect parts of our region from devastating 
floods.
  To put it simply: the Columbia River System is critical to our entire 
way of life.
  Thanks to historic investments by Congress through the years, the 
four Lower Snake River dams are nearly transparent to salmon. With some 
of the most effective fish passage systems in the nation, these dams 
have achieved an average survival rate for ocean-bound juvenile salmon 
of between 95 and 97 percent. For adults, that average is more than 98 
percent.
  The scientific evidence supports the reality that dams and salmon 
can--and do--co-exist. According to a 2018 evaluation conducted by the 
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, 99.6 percent of juveniles and 97.3 
percent of all yearling Chinook salmon safely bypassed the Lower 
Granite Darn--a survival rate that exceeds the NOAA Biological 
performance standard of 96 percent.
  The same study found that steelhead salmon enjoyed a 100 percent 
juvenile survival rate and an overall dam passage rate of 99.4 percent. 
On top of that, available data suggests that 2023 was the highest count 
for adult sockeye salmon on record at Lower Granite Dam with 2,921 
adults returning.
  Despite the rhetoric surrounding the Lower Snake River dams and 
salmon, we continue to see improvements in the returns with 2024 
currently on track to be the third straight year of exceeding the 10-
year average sockeye return.
  This is not a coincidence. The Lower Snake River dams utilize some of 
the most informative technology we have to help fish migrate the river, 
including fish slides and fish ladders to help salmon get over the dams 
safely, fish friendly turbines, spillways, and bypass facilities.

  As a result, a recent study conducted by NOAA Fisheries concluded 
that survival rates along the Snake River system are approaching levels 
seen on rivers without dams. In fact, this study found that wild 
juvenile steelhead transported through the dams by barge return as an 
adult at an 80 percent higher rate than in-river migrating fish.
  In 1938, before the dams were built, it is estimated that 1.67 
million salmon and steelhead returned to the mouth of the Columbia 
River. In 2022, that estimate grew to 2.38 million. We do not have to 
choose between saving our dams and preserving our salmon populations. 
We can continue to protect endangered salmon without sacrificing our 
way of life.
  The Lower Snake River dams are critical for strengthening our energy 
grid and providing our region with some of the lowest energy costs in 
the nation. They help give us our competitive edge. In the Pacific 
Northwest, roughly 60 percent of the power consumed comes from 
hydroelectricity; in Washington state alone, that figure is closer to 
70 percent.
  Lower Granite Dam alone has six hydroelectric generators that 
generate up to 135 megawatts (MW) of energy each. Together, they have 
the capacity to generate 810 megawatts, which is enough electricity to 
power a city the size of Portland, Oregon.
  Ice Harbor Dam, another part of the Colulnbia-Snake River System, can 
generate enough electricity to power all of the homes in Spokane, 
Spokane Valley, and Wenatchee. Perhaps one of the most underappreciated 
aspects of the hydropower produced by these dams is that it can be 
dispatched at a moments notice, helping families and businesses keep 
their lights on year-round.
  The Columbia-Snake River System also serves as a super-marine highway 
for farmers to ship their products all across America and around the 
world, all while reducing carbon emissions and lowering shipping costs.
  Each year, nearly 10 percent of all U.S. wheat exports are barged on 
the Snake River. Additionally, roughly 250,000 tons of wood chips are 
barged between locations on the Lower Columbia River and Lewiston, 
Idaho, where they are turned into pulp for paper production at mills 
across our region.
  In 2020, approximately 4.2 million tons of cargo were transported 
through the Snake River dams. It would have taken more than 42,000 rail 
cars or 162,000 semi-trucks to transport that amount of cargo on land. 
If these dams were breached, it would lead to an increase in diesel 
fuel consumption by nearly 5 million gallons per year. It would also 
result in an increase in CO2 and other harmful emissions by more than 
1.2 million tons per year.
  The increased trucking activity would- also increase the cost of 
fuel, highway and terminal facility maintenance, driver time, and 
vehicle maintenance by more than $69 million per year, all of which 
would be passed on to consumers.
  The bottom line is that tearing out the Lower Snake River dams would 
not only diminish grid reliability and make it harder for local farmers 
to feed the world, it would be counterproductive to achieving our 
carbon reduction goals.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in recognizing the 
enormous benefits the four Lower Snake River Dams provide for the 
people of Eastern Washington and for the entire Pacific Northwest.
I rise today to recognize the Global 
Medical Response Stars of Life award recipients for 2024.
  Each year, the American Ambulance Association (AAA) honors a select 
group of Emergency Medical Services professionals for their commitment 
to patient care, integrity, and compassion through the Stars of Life 
program. Global Medical Response, a member of the AAA and the worlds 
largest provider of emergent and non-emergent medical transportation 
and healthcare services, has identified 33 of its frontline heroes for 
this distinction, representing the best of the best in the air and on 
the ground.
  We will find these heroes all around us in our communities. From 
Maui, Hawaii where a Paramedic, served as the Incident Commander for 
EMS ground units during the deadly 2023 fire that devastated Lahaina to 
an advanced EMF in Lagrange, GA, who safely delivered a baby while the 
babys mother was being transported to a hospital, and performed 
lifesaving interventions on the newborn, who was ``pulseless at the 
time of birth to Waco, TX where a paramedic, saved the life of a 
cardiac arrest patient after working on the individual for 30 minutes 
before achieving return of spontaneous circulation.
  There are countless stories to share and so much that we can learn 
from the day-to-day lives of these heroes. We must learn to exhibit 
integrity in everything we do and everything we say. We must act with 
compassion and grace in even the most daunting and challenging of 
situations. We must be vigilant, never wavering in our commitment to 
doing what is right for the community and answering the call to serve.
  So that we will never forget the immense contributions to our 
communities made by the 2024 Global Medical Response Stars of Life 
award recipients, I respectfully request that each of their names be 
included in the Record to honor their service and humbly thank them for 
showing us what it means to truly serve, while providing care to the 
world at a moments notice.

       Frank Alba, Critical Care Paramedic of Kansas City, KS; 
     Johan Alvarado, Flight Paramedic of Laredo, TX; Aubree 
     Arneson, Advanced EMT of Brookings, OR; Henry Barsh, EMT of 
     Washington, D.C.; Antoine Berenger, Firefighter, EMT, of 
     Tempe, AZ; Heather James, Advanced EMT of Lagrange, GA; Emily 
     Chandler, EMS Programs Manager of Springfield, MA; Josh 
     Cavaness, Flight Paramedic of Chanute, KS; Andrew Davalos, 
     Paramedic of Rancho Cucamonga, CA; Riggs Egolf, Paramedic of 
     Hampton, VA.
       Juvencio Estrada, Flight Nurse of Laredo, TX; Brent Fisher, 
     Flight Paramedic of Poplar Bluff, MO; Jason Florance, 
     Paramedic of Topeka, KS; Scotland Hamlin, EMT, Field Training 
     Officer of Orlando, FL; Jason Henry, Fire Captain of Tempe, 
     AZ; Jason Hodges, Operations Supervisor of Portland, OR; 
     David Kingdon, Paramedic of Maui County, HI; Daniel ``Dan 
     Laguna, Pilot of Elko, NV; Matthew Lambert, Paramedic, 
     Lifeguard of Florence, AL; Miki Leslie, EMT, Field Training 
     Officer of Yakima, WA.
       Alyssa Meier, EMT of Prescott, AZ; Eli Melamed, Paramedic 
     of Prescott, AZ; Megan Overbeck, Paramedic of Decatur, IL; 
     Michael Pernna, Critical Care Transport Registered Nurse of 
     Redlands, CA; Kevin Rochford, Paramedic of Waco, TX; Lance 
     Smeal, Advanced EMF, Field Training Officer of Buffalo, NY.
       Raquel Soto, Paramedic of West Hartford, CT; Jason 
     Southard, Operations Supervisor of Tucson, AZ; Shane Terry, 
     Flight Paramedic of Big Spring, TX; Andrew Varela, Paramedic, 
     Field Training Officer of Modesto, CA; Lucie Walters, Flight 
     Respiratory Therapist of Birmingham, AL; Nikki Warren, Flight 
     Nurse of Poplar Bluff, MO; Ambrose Stevens, Paramedic, 
     Operations Manager of Redding, CA.
along with my colleagues Senators Mike 
Crapo and Jim Risch, I rise to recognize the leadership of Ty Blackford 
within his roles as President and Program Manager at the Idaho 
Environmental Coalition (IEC).
  During his time as President and Program Manager at IEC, Ty Blackford 
led his team to advance the cleanup mission at the U.S. Department of 
Energys (DOE) Idaho National Laboratory Site (INL). Under his 
leadership, in 2022, IEC completed the exhumation of legacy waste at 
the Sites Subsurface Disposal Area 18 months ahead of schedule. 
Following the demolition of two ancillary structures at the Naval 
Reactors Facility, his team began demolition of the Submarine 1st 
Generation Westinghouse reactor prototype and recycled more than 420 
tons of non-radiological metals. In 2023, Tys team completed the 
transfer of spent nuclear fuel from wet to dry storage nine months 
ahead of schedule.
  In 2024, Ty led the IEC team to complete the Accelerated Retrieval 
Project, one of the largest demolition projects completed in the 
history of DOEs environmental cleanup program. The project was 
completed three months ahead of schedule and under budget. In all, 
workers demolished more than 520,000 square feet of building space, 
which is equivalent to three times the footprint of the U.S. Capitol 
building in Washington, D.C.
  Under Tys leadership, operations began at the Integrated Waste 
Treatment Unit in 2023 as well. To date, the project has processed over 
100,000 gallons of sodium-bearing waste. These most recent 
accomplishments have paved the way for DOE to meet two significant 
milestones outlined in the Idaho Settlement Agreement for the State of 
Idaho.
  Each of these accomplishments speak to Tys 30-plus years of 
experience leading and managing large and complex projects for DOEs 
cleanup and nuclear operations programs at sites across the Nation, 
including the Idaho Cleanup Project, Savannah River, Hanford and Oak 
Ridge. He has set the bar high for future leaders and has established a 
baseline for success, of which Idaho can be proud.
  We thank Ty Blackford for his diligence in his role as President and 
Program Manager at IEC and for his accomplishments in the cleanup 
mission at INL.
I rise today to recognize Dr. Brian E. 
Fuchs, who retired this month after 41 years of faithful and dedicated 
service as a civilian employee of the U.S. Army.
  After graduating from the New Jersey Institute of Technology, Dr. 
Fuchs chose to apply his knowledge and experience to the U.S. 
militarys munitions research at Picatinny Arsenal located in NJ-11. 
The contributions he has made to our national defense, and to our 
allies defense, are enormous, and we all owe him a debt of gratitude.
.S. Army in 1983 where he worked in 
energetics materials testing, detonation physics, and energetic 
formulations. Since then, Dr. Fuchs has maintained a variety of 
different positions on various boards and organizations focused on 
insensitive munitions research. Dr. Fuchs is also a leader in the 
rapidly growing field of research on explosive ink where, under his 
leadership, his team was able to produce the first qualified explosive 
ink.
  Along with his long career in munitions development, Dr. Fuchs is an 
Adjunct Professor for the Stevens Institute of Technology and serves as 
the Steering committee chair for NATOs Munitions Safety Information 
Analysis Center (MSIAC).
  Widely recognized by several organizations, Dr. Fuchs was awarded the 
National Defense Industrial Association Firepower Award for Technology 
Development in 2016. Dr. Fuchs has also been awarded the Academic R&amp;D 
Award by Printed Electronics USA, the Six Army Research Development 
Achievement Award for Technical Excellence, and the Army Research 
Development Award for Leadership. These awards were all given in 
recognition of Dr. Fuchs outstanding devotion to duty and his 
contributions to research and development of munitions.
  I want to thank Dr. Fuchs for the critical engineering and research 
work that he and his team have done over his career to support our 
national defense, and I wish him the best for a well-earned and restful 
retirement.
I rise today on behalf of a grateful 
Nation and the Citizens of the Twenty-Fourth District of Texas. The 
2024 Congressional Veteran Commendation is hereby presented to Zachary 
Ceballos, Lance Corporal, United States Marine Corps, of Euless, Texas 
for his honorable service in the Armed Forces of the United States of 
America and for his continued service to his community,
2008, 
serving as a rifleman with 1st Battalion, 5th Marines, deploying to 
Sangin, Afghanistan in support of Operation Enduring Freedom in 2011. 
During his deployment, his unit would suffer significant losses that 
would lay the foundation for his current dedication to supporting 
veterans from all eras of service.
, 
the Global War on Terrorism Service Medal, the Afghanistan Campaign 
Medal with 2 service stars, the NATO Medal--ISAF Afghanistan, the Sea 
Service Deployment Ribbon, the Marine Corps Good Conduct Medal, and the 
Expert Rifle Badge.
  His dedication to service does not stop with his time in the 
military. He currently serves as a veteran peer support specialist for 
GallantFew, a local veteran service organization. He devotes his spare 
time to coaching veterans on mental health, teaching them rock 
climbing, helping lead the Metroport Veterans Association, and planning 
Melborial Day as well as Veterans Day observances in the community.
, the 
State of Texas, and the United States of America.