I rise today to honor and congratulate a 
devoted public servant, Elissa DeVito of Preston, Connecticut. Elissa 
is retiring from teaching at Waterford Public Schools after over 30 
years of dedicated service. Her decades of outstanding expertise and 
dedication to her community will be sorely missed.
  Elissa spent her early life in Rockville, Maryland before attending 
Syracuse University where she met the love of her life, Michael. Elissa 
moved to Connecticut in May of 1991. She and Michael lived in Groton 
and Mystic before settling in Preston in 1994, where they have been 
ever since.
  Elissa chose a path of public service and has dedicated her life to 
education and teaching. For decades, she has worked as a teacher, 
helping to shape the minds of generations of children. She began her 
career with Waterford Public Schools on November 30, 1992, at 
Oswegatchie Elementary School. She stayed at Oswegatchie until the fall 
of 2009 when she transferred to Quaker Hill Elementary School. While 
Elissa has spent most of her career working with kindergarteners, she 
has also spent a few years working with first and second graders.
  Always going above and beyond to create a caring and supportive 
environment for the students that entered her classroom, it has been 
Elissas mission to provide the next generation with the tools they 
need to succeed. Elissa is a natural educator and has been known as an 
expert at teaching young students to read. Students go from learning 
the letters of the alphabet to reading books by the end of their time 
in her classroom.
  As she enters retirement, Elissa is looking forward to spending more 
time reading, one of her favorite pastimes, visiting her daughters, 
Samantha, Emily, and Alexa and going on trips with her husband Michael.
, it is an honor to represent constituents as devoted and 
compassionate as Elissa. Elissa has impacted hundreds of students 
during her career. Elissa will leave behind an expert skill set and 
enthusiasm that will be hard to replace, but her 33 years of unwavering 
dedication to the Waterford community will leave a legacy for years to 
come through each and every one of her students. Mr. Speaker, I ask 
that my colleagues join me in recognizing Elissa DeVitos immeasurable 
contributions and congratulating her on her well-earned retirement.
CONGRATULATING SOPHIA RIVERA, GIRLS SHOT PUT AND DISCUS STATE CHAMPION
I am pleased to congratulate Sophia Rivera 
of Ephrata High School on winning gold medals in both girls shot put 
and girls discus at the 2025 PIAA Class 3A Track and Field 
Championship, held on May 23 and 24.
  The 2025 PIAA Class 3A track and field championship took place on May 
23 and 24,

during which Ephrata junior Sophia Rivera excelled in shot put and 
discus. On the first day, Rivera captured the state title in girls 
shot put with a distance of 43 feet, 3 inches. Her domination continued 
into girls discus the following day, where a throw of 143 feet, 3 
inches nabbed the gold medal.
  Sophia Riveras two state titles crown a spectacular season and a 
complete sweep in the postseason, as Rivera won gold medals in both 
events during the Lancaster-Lebanon League championship and the 
District Three championship weeks prior.
  With two state titles and a total of 6 gold medals during the track 
and field postseason, Sophia Rivera has firmly established herself as 
one of Pennsylvanias best in shot put and discus. I offer my sincere 
congratulations to Sophia on her success this year and look forward to 
seeing what she accomplishes next.
I rise today to honor Mr. Dale W. Sisson, 
Jr., on his retirement from the Naval Surface Warfare Center, Dahlgren 
Division (NSWCDD), after a distinguished career dedicated to serving 
our nation.
He has served NSWCDD with 
distinction for over two decades, culminating in his role as Technical 
Director, where he oversaw a $1.8 billion portfolio of research, 
development, test, and evaluation. His leadership of the 4,930-member 
NSWCDD workforce has been instrumental in ensuring the technical 
excellence of complex naval combat, sensor, weapon, and strategic 
systems, making Dahlgren a vital asset to our national defense and a 
source of pride for Virginias First Congressional District.
  Prior to his role as Technical Director, Mr. Sisson served as the 
Executive Director of the Naval Ordnance Safety and Security Activity 
(NOSSA) and Deputy for Weapons Safety, Naval Sea Systems Command 
(NAVSEA). In these critical roles, he was responsible for providing 
executive and technical direction for all ordnance surety programs 
assigned to NOSSA and ensuring the safety and effectiveness of our Navy 
and Marine Corps munitions through his work with the Department of the 
Navys Weapon System Explosives Safety Review Board.
, including his tenure 
as Head of the Electromagnetic &amp; Sensor Systems Department and his 
detail as Director of Systems Engineering within the office of the 
Deputy Assistant Secretary of the Navy for Research, Development, Test, 
&amp; Evaluation (DASN (RDT&amp;E)), further demonstrate his dedication and 
expertise. His contributions to the Navys development of laser 
weapons, recognized with the Department of the Navys Superior Civilian 
Service medal in 2015, exemplify his innovative spirit and technical 
prowess.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in thanking Mr. Dale W. 
Sisson, Jr., for his years of dedicated service to our Nation and in 
wishing him all the best in his well-deserved retirement. He has made a 
significant and lasting impact on our national security, and we are 
deeply grateful for his contributions.
I rise today to honor the 
life and legacy of Hollis Hamilton Hooks, a lifelong Lakelander whose 
quiet leadership and steady service left a lasting impact on the 
community he loved.
  Hollis never sought the spotlight, but his influence was deeply felt 
throughout Polk County. From his early work in Washington to a 
successful career in financial services, he remained guided by a strong 
sense of duty to give back.
  In 1992, Hollis was elected to the Polk County School Board, where he 
helped lead the districts first strategic planning effort. He 
championed policies to expand school choice and raise academic 
standards through the development of magnet programs. He also served on 
the board of the Polk Education Foundation, where he helped channel 
private-sector support into classroom resources, scholarships, teacher 
recognition programs and professional development.
  Hollis made a significant impact on the health and wellbeing of our 
region. As chairman of the board for the Lakeland Regional Medical 
Center, he played a key role in guiding improvements to local care. 
Through his work with the hospitals foundation, he helped drive 
critical investments in enhanced services and modernized facilities to 
meet the needs of a rapidly growing community.
  His commitment to civic life extended to the arts and public 
discourse. He served on the board of the Polk Museum of Art, working to 
increase access to arts education and cultural programming. He also sat 
on the board of LkldNows parent nonprofit, underscoring his belief in 
the value of informed and engaged local communities.
  Hollis Hooks was more than a civic leader. He was my friend, a fellow 
elder at First Presbyterian Church of Lakeland, and a man of profound 
integrity. My prayers are with his wife Debbie, their children and all 
who had the privilege of knowing him. Hollis made Lakeland stronger, 
and his example of humble leadership will continue to guide and 
inspire.
  May we honor his memory by living lives of purpose and service.
today, I introduce the REAL ID Gender 
Requirement Reform Act, which would repeal the requirement in the REAL 
ID Act that REAL ID-compliant licenses include gender. Instead, states 
would decide whether to include gender on their respective REAL ID-
compliant licenses. I am pleased Representative Maxwell Frost is co-
leading this bill.
  Under this bill, if a state includes gender on its REAL ID-compliant 
licenses, the state must allow individuals to change the gender 
designation on their license through self-attestation. It would also 
require states that include gender on their REAL ID-compliant licenses 
to have a neutral or other designation gender field, in addition to 
male or female.
  Under the REAL ID Act, gender must be included on a license. This can 
be problematic for transgender and nonbinary individuals. I recognize 
that some LGBTQ+ individuals do not want gender designations on 
licenses at all, while others do want gender designation so as to 
express their identity. I believe this bill strikes the middle ground, 
while showing Congress support for LGBTQ+ individuals.
  I urge my colleagues to support this bill.
I rise today to honor Anita Altman, a 
distinguished New Yorker and cherished member of our community, who 
will celebrate her 80th birthday on June 2, 2025.
  Anita has devoted her life to building a more inclusive, 
compassionate, and just society. A proud daughter of the Bronx, Anita 
was raised in a working-class Greek Jewish household by her parents, 
Jack and Sarah, and her grandparents Anna and Zadick Coffino, who 
emigrated from the Ottoman Empire and made their home on the Lower East 
Side. From these deep roots, Anita cultivated a lifelong commitment to 
public service, Jewish communal life, and progressive social change.
  After earning her B.A. from City College and a Masters in Health 
Services Administration from the New School, Anita began a career that 
would span urban planning, public health, and groundbreaking social 
advocacy. From her early work at the New York City Planning Department 
and Montefiore Medical Center to her service on Manhattans Community 
Board 7, Anita has been a tireless force for equitable development, 
healthcare access, and community empowerment.
  Anitas visionary leadership at UJA-Federation transformed the 
landscape of aging and disability services in New York. She was 
instrumental in launching the states first programs for Naturally 
Occurring Retirement Communities, helping thousands of seniors age with 
dignity in the communities they helped build. She led one of the first 
Jewish communal responses to the AIDS epidemic and convened the 
Federations Task Force on

Family Violence, for which she was honored with the Governors Courage 
Award and the Woman of Valor award from the New York Board of Rabbis.
  Perhaps most widely known is Anitas creation of the Reel Abilities 
Film Festival, the nations largest showcase of films by and about 
people with disabilities. Through ReelAbilities, Anita helped elevate 
underrepresented voices, challenge public perceptions, and promote the 
full inclusion of people with disabilities in American life.
  As she celebrates 80 extraordinary years, I recognize Anita Altman 
for her vision, her integrity, and her unwavering belief that all 
people deserve to live with dignity, visibility, and respect.
Title IV of Senate Resolution 4, agreed to by the Senate of February 
4, 1977, calls for establishment of a system for a computerized 
schedule of all meetings and hearings of Senate committees, 
subcommittees, joint committees, and committees of conference. This 
title requires all such committees to notify the Office of the Senate 
Daily Digest--designated by the Rules Committee--of the time, place and 
purpose of the meetings, when scheduled and any cancellations or 
changes in the meetings as they occur.
  As an additional procedure along with the computerization of this 
information, the Office of the Senate Daily Digest will prepare this 
information for printing in the Extensions of Remarks section of the 
Congressional Record on Monday and Wednesday of each week.
  Meetings scheduled for Tuesday, June 3, 2025 may be found in the 
Daily Digest of todays Record.

                                 JUNE 4
     10 a.m.
       Committee on Appropriations
       Subcommittee on Commerce, Justice, Science, and Related 
           Agencies
         To hold hearings to examine proposed budget estimates for 
           fiscal year 2026 for the Department of Commerce.
                                                            SD-192
       Committee on Foreign Relations
         To hold hearings to examine dismantling transnational 
           criminal organizations in the Americas.
                                                            SD-419
       Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions
         To hold hearings to examine the reauthorization of the 
           over-the-counter monograph drug user fee program.
                                                            SD-430
     10:15 a.m.
       Committee on the Judiciary
         To hold hearings to examine pending nominations.
                                                            SH-216
     2:30 p.m.
       Committee on Foreign Relations
       Subcommittee on Africa and Global Health Policy
         To hold hearings to examine Chinas malign influence in 
           Africa.
                                                            SD-419
     4 p.m.
       Committee on Veterans Affairs
         To hold hearings to examine the nominations of Cheryl 
           Mason, of North Carolina, to be Inspector General, and 
           Donald Bergin III, of Virginia, to be an Assistant 
           Secretary (Congressional and Legislative Affairs), both 
           of the Department of Veterans Affairs.
                                                            SR-418
     4:15 p.m.
       Special Committee on Aging
         To hold hearings to examine the aging farm workforce, 
           focusing on Americas vanishing family farms.
                                                            SH-216
                                 JUNE 5
     9:30 a.m.
       Committee on Armed Services
         To hold hearings to examine the posture of the Department 
           of the Army in review of the Defense Authorization 
           Request for Fiscal Year 2026 and the Future Years 
           Defense Program; to be immediately followed by a closed 
           session in SVC-217.
                                                            SD-G50
       Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
         To hold hearings to examine the nominations of Sean 
           Cairncross, of Minnesota, to be National Cyber 
           Director, Robert Law, of the District of Columbia, to 
           be Under Secretary for Strategy, Policy, and Plans, 
           James Percival, of Florida, to be General Counsel, and 
           Sean Plankey, of Pennsylvania, to be Director of the 
           Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency, all 
           of the Department of Homeland Security, Kevin Rhodes, 
           of Florida, to be Administrator for Federal Procurement 
           Policy, and James Woodruff II, of Florida, to be a 
           Member of the Merit Systems Protection Board.
                                                            SD-342
     10 a.m.
       Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions
         To hold hearings to examine the nominations of Penny 
           Schwinn, of Tennessee, to be Deputy Secretary, and 
           Kimberly Richey, of Texas, to be Assistant Secretary 
           for Civil Rights, both of the Department of Education, 
           and Daniel Aronowitz, of Virginia, and David Keeling, 
           of Kentucky, both to be an Assistant Secretary of 
           Labor.
                                                            SD-430
       Joint Economic Committee
         To hold hearings to examine barriers to supply chain 
           modernization and factor productivity enhancements.
                                                          CHOB-210
     10:15 a.m.
       Committee on the Judiciary
         Business meeting to consider S. 1829, to combat the 
           sexual exploitation of children by supporting victims 
           and promoting accountability and transparency by the 
           tech industry, and the nominations of Stanley Woodward, 
           Jr., of the District of Columbia, and Thomas Gaiser, of 
           Ohio, both to be an Assistant Attorney General, Ronald 
           A. Parsons, Jr., to be United States Attorney for the 
           District of South Dakota, and David Charles Waterman, 
           to be United States Attorney for the Southern District 
           of Iowa, all of the Department of Justice, Joseph 
           Edlow, of Maryland, to be Director of United States 
           Citizenship and Immigration Services, Department of 
           Homeland Security, and John Squires, of Florida, to be 
           Under Secretary of Commerce for Intellectual Property 
           and Director of the United States Patent and Trademark 
           Office.
                                                            SH-216
     10:30 a.m.
       Committee on Foreign Relations
         Business meeting to consider S. 1397, to require the 
           Secretary of State to establish a quantum cooperation 
           program to enhance international cooperation in quantum 
           information science, S. 1463, to allow the Secretary of 
           the Interior to enter into memoranda of understanding 
           for the purpose of scientific and technical cooperation 
           in the mapping of critical minerals and rare earth 
           elements, S. 1478, to provide the United States 
           Government with additional tools to deter state and 
           non-state actors from wrongfully detaining United 
           States nationals for political leverage, S. 1579, to 
           provide for the treatment of the Association of 
           Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), the European 
           Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN), and the 
           Pacific Islands Forum (PIF) as international 
           organizations for purposes of the International 
           Organizations Immunities Act, S. 1731, to require the 
           Secretary of State and the Secretary of Defense to 
           develop a strategy in response to the global basing 
           intentions of the Peoples Republic of China, S. 1780, 
           to provide for congressional oversight of security 
           assistance to Mexico, S. 1801, to facilitate the 
           development of a whole-of-government strategy for 
           nuclear cooperation and nuclear exports, S. Res. 227, 
           condemning Hamas for its premeditated, coordinated, and 
           brutal terrorist attacks on October 7, 2023, against 
           Israel and demanding that Hamas immediately release all 
           remaining hostages and return them to safety, an 
           original bill entitled, ``Defending International 
           Security by Restricting Unlawful Partnerships and 
           Tactics (DISRUPT``) Act, and an original bill 
           entitled, ``Taiwan Non-Discrimination Act of 2025.
                                                             S-116

                                 JUNE 4
     2:30 p.m.
       Committee on Appropriations
       Subcommittee on Energy and Water Development
         To hold hearings to examine proposed budget estimates for 
           fiscal year 2026 for the National Nuclear Security 
           Administration.
                                                            SD-124
       Select Committee on Intelligence
         To hold closed hearings to examine certain intelligence 
           matters.
                                                            SH-219
I rise today to pay tribute to Ashook 
Ramsaran, a distinguished civic and community leader in my Sixth 
Congressional District.
a resident of Queens, New York, since 
emigrating from Guyana (formerly British Guiana) in 1968. He is the 
third generation of Indian indentured laborers who worked on British 
sugar cane plantations after the emancipation of enslaved people in 
British colonies in 1834. His great-grandfather, Pooriye, arrived in 
Guyana in 1853 aboard the ship Adelaide, and his great-grandmother, 
Radhah, arrived in 1860 aboard the ship Colgrain. His family faced 
significant struggles and persevered under extremely harsh conditions 
on the plantations. Throughout the generations, they worked tirelessly 
to build a better life in Guyana rather than return to poverty in 
India.
, an 
opportunity he valued greatly. He attended Auchlyne Church of Scotland 
Primary School and Corentyne High School through a Booker Sugar Estates 
Scholarship. He graduated high school with diplomas from the University 
of Cambridge and the University of London. He briefly worked as a 
primary school teacher at Yakusari Primary School, then at the Ministry 
of Health in Georgetown, and as a clerk at magistrates courts in New 
Amsterdam and Whim Village in Guyana.
  Before leaving for the U.S.A. to pursue higher education and a better 
life for his family, Mr. Ramsaran married Camille (formerly Camille 
Ramgadoo). He embodied the American dream with courage, determination, 
and a commitment to succeed. While attending college and supporting his 
family, which included his wife and two small children, he held several 
jobs. He earned advanced engineering degrees from Polytechnic-New York 
University and persevered through many hardships, including violent 
racial attacks against his family and their home. With remarkable 
resilience, he exceeded expectations, purchased a home, quickly 
advanced to prominent positions in major companies, funded his 
childrens college education, and established a successful engineering 
firm in Queens, New York. He has become a role model for his immediate 
and extended family, as well as for others in his community.
  Together with Camille, Mr. Ramsaran is the parent of Arnold and the 
late Gerald, and they are the grandparents of Jaden and Gavin, all of 
whom reside in Queens.
, including: Executive Vice-President of the Queens Civic 
Congress (QCC); Chair of the Community Advisory Council for NY 
Presbyterian Hospital/Queens (NYP/Q); President of the Indian Diaspora 
Council International (IDC); Past President of GOPIO International 
(2011 to 2016); Board Member of the Center for Caribbean &amp; Latin 
American Studies at St. Johns University (SJU/CLACS); Executive Board 
Member of India Empire, a Diaspora publication; Financial Co-Chair and 
Elder of the First Presbyterian Church of Flushing, New York (FPC); 
Board Member of the Fresh Meadows Civic Association, New York (FMHCA); 
Chair of the Queens Civic Congress Conference 2022, addressing critical 
community issues such as civic engagement, transportation, land use, 
public safety, services for seniors and children, homelessness, 
education, real estate tax equity, redistricting, discrimination, and 
racial justice; Member of the District 24 AM Weprin South Asian 
Advisory Panel (SAAP); Member of the Queens Borough Presidents Census 
2020 Committee; Member of the Queens Borough Presidents Civic 
Engagement Committee; and Delegate to the Queens Borough Presidents 
General Assembly (QGA).
, 
communities, and individuals. His landmarking efforts include the 
Brinckerhoff Colonial Dutch Cemetery (1713), and he has facilitated 
street namings such as Little Guyana Avenue, Don Capalbi Way (in honor 
of an exceptional civic leader), Old Towne of Flushing Burial Ground 
Lane (a historic cemetery for African Americans and Native Americans), 
Brinckerhoff Memorial Way, and others that honor civic and religious 
leaders.
  Additionally, Mr. Ramsaran has established memorials to commemorate 
Indian indentureship in various British colonies from 1828 to 1917, 
including the Kolkata Memorial in India and Indian Arrival Monuments in 
Guyana. Trinidad and Tobago, Martinique, and other locations. He 
embraces his noble and selfless service to the global Indian Diaspora 
community in various ways, tracing his roots to a rich and enduring 
heritage.
``feels blessed to be an American, 
where he lives and contributes to improving the lives of others by 
utilizing his skills, resources, and advocacy. He is dedicated to his 
moral obligation and duty to give back to society--specifically to 
Queens, New York, and the Nation--providing him with opportunities and 
the freedom to progress while helping those who are less fortunate.
  Queens is the most diverse county in the United States, and Mr. 
Ramsaran actively collaborates with many groups and organizations to 
address common concerns. He deeply engages with community issues of 
interest and importance, making significant contributions that resonate 
throughout the community.