I rise today to honor our 2024 Congressional 
Medalist recipient from North Carolinas 13th Congressional District, 
Hemharsith Sivakumar Gayathri. At such a young age, Mr. Gayathri has 
demonstrated tremendous leadership, academic excellence, and commitment 
to his community.
  Hemharsith has been recognized for his academic and community 
contributions with the Outstanding Academic Excellence Award from the 
President of the United States and the Community Oscar Award for 
Outstanding Student of the Year.
  In a testament to his determination and skill, Hemharsith is an FAA-
certified glider pilot, who embarked on his journey in gliding at the 
age of 14 on August 14, 2021. He achieved a significant milestone on 
October 22, 2022, by completing his Glider Solo. His dedication and 
perseverance led to the attainment of his Glider License at the age of 
16 on July 2, 2023, marking a remarkable milestone in his aviation 
journey.
  Hemharsith has showcased exceptional leadership by founding the South 
Garner High School Cadet Titan Corps and actively engaging in the Civil 
Air Patrol, where he achieved the esteemed rank of Cadet 1st Lieutenant 
and was honored as the recipient of The Mitchell Award.
  Hemharsiths dedication to community service is evident through his 
roles as a junior volunteer firefighter at Fairview Fire Department, a 
certified Red Cross lifeguard, and an active volunteer in various 
flying associations.
  Hemharsith is also a leader in academics and is ranked among the top 
few in his class at South Garner High School. He has committed himself 
to excel further in learning and is a high-achieving student in the CCP 
program at Wake Tech Community College.
, I ask my esteemed colleagues to join me in extending our 
heartfelt congratulations and best wishes to Hemiharsith Sivakumar 
Gayathri as he accepts the Congressional Medal for 2024. His commitment 
to service, perseverance, and academics represents the best of our 
state, reminding us all of the impact one person can have on the world 
around us.
  A sincere and heartfelt congratulations to Mr. Gayathri on this well-
deserved recognition.
HONORING ARMANDO ``CURTIS HIERRO AS A DISTINGUISHED LEADER IN CENTRAL 
                               of florida
Armando ``Curtis Hierro is a 36-year-old 
Cuban-American. He is the national field director for the 
Communications Workers of America with years of experience organizing 
for workers and human rights in Florida.
  Curtis has a Bachelor of Arts in History from the University of 
Central Florida and a certificate in leadership, organizing, and action 
from the Harvard Kennedy School.
  Organizing is a deeply held passion for Curtis. Curtis was born in 
Miami, Florida, into a single-mother household where his family faced 
immense economic challenges, poverty, and homelessness. Through a 
strong work ethic, a belief in the power of community, and a commitment 
to education passed on by his mother and grandmother, he was able to be 
the first person in his family to attend and graduate college. While at 
the University of Central Florida, Curtis organized students to stand 
up for campus custodial staff in contract fights and support immigrant 
workers from the Coalition of Immokalee Workers.
  From 2012 to 2016, Curtis was a founding member and the first field 
director for the organization Dream Defenders--a community organization 
in Florida led by young people of color building power and organizing 
local and statewide campaigns to address issues of poverty, for-profit 
prisons, and accountable policing. Moving on to the Central Florida 
AFL-CIO as organizing director, Curtis led the AFL-CIOs efforts to 
directly support the contract fight for fair wages by Disney workers 
represented by Unite Here and helped organize workers forming their 
union for the first time with the Communications Workers of America. 
Additionally, Curtis co-led the fight to make Orlando the first city in 
the southeast United States to adopt a Trust Act to safeguard immigrant 
communities in 2018.
  Curtis now focuses his efforts on supporting CWA members in Florida 
and across the country in developing their leadership and taking action 
to build worker power.
Cheryl Reid-Payne was born on the beautiful 
island of Barbados, immigrated to London, England, and eventually moved 
to New York. There, she pursued a career in the medical field and 
obtained her certification as a nursing assistant.
  After over 20 years of living in New York, she moved to Central 
Florida in 2002 and continued her passion for helping people by working 
at several nursing facilities. Cheryl, a champion of serving the 
community, also sought opportunities to do so by becoming a member of 
the CFAFCC, NAFCC, NAACP, and the Caribbean and Floridian Association, 
known as CAFA. She has been an active member of CAFA for the past 23 
years serving in many capacities, such as chaplin, corresponding 
secretary, and co-chair of the Service Activities/Education Committee, 
for which she is currently the sole chairperson. In this capacity, 
Cheryl enjoys planning, shopping, and delivering Christmas giveaways to 
residents at Central Florida nursing facilities. During Thanksgiving, 
she also hands out turkeys at several locations in Kissimmee to 
families in need. At CAFAs biggest annual community event, Caribbean 
Fusion, held in Kissimmee, you can find her by the medical tent taking 
blood pressure as she is also on CAFAs Medical Committee as a nursing 
assistant.
  Additionally, Cheryl and her team fundraise for and provide college 
scholarships at CAFAs yearly scholarship awards ceremony to Osceola 
County high school students with impeccable GPA scores. Students also 
receive special gift bags, which Cheryl shops for and donates to the 
students with great pleasure.
  Keeping in line with her passion and love for children, Cheryl 
officially opened Cheryls Daycare, which was opened in the Poinciana 
area for 18 years. Beyond Cheryls social and professional endeavors, 
she finds comfort in serving as an usher at her local church in 
Poinciana.
  It has been and remains her honor to serve the community and she 
looks forward to continuing to do so with passion and care, with a goal 
of becoming a member of the Chamber of Commerce. Currently, she is 
happy being a wife and mother of four children and five grandchildren.
I rise along with my colleague and fellow 
Marquette University graduate, Rep. Gwen Moore, to honor the life and 
legacy of President Michael Rhodes Lovell, Ph.D., an accomplished 
engineer and the 24th president of my alma mater. His decade of 
leadership was transformative for both the Marquette and Milwaukee 
communities.
  In his lifelong pursuit of academic excellence, Dr. Lovell completed 
three mechanical engineering degrees at the University of Pittsburgh, 
was a fellow of the American Society of Mechanical Engineers and the 
National Academy of Inventors and held U.S. and global patents. He 
published more than 100 articles in engineering journals, coauthored 
Tribology for Scientists and Engineers and was awarded nearly $30 
million in research grants for which he was a lead investigator. His 
brilliance did not go unnoticed: he won a National Science Foundation 
CAREER award and the ASME Burt L. Newkirk award in Tribology. Dr. 
Lovell understood the importance of research and development, and 
Marquette more than doubled its research and development expenditures 
in his tenure.
  Before joining Marquettes community, Dr. Lovell was the engineering 
school dean at the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee for three years. 
He was later appointed as the schools eighth chancellor in 2011. Once 
at Marquette, he led the implementation of Beyond Boundaries--a 
strategic plan that encourages students, faculty and staff alike to 
think creatively and to lead impactful lives through entrepreneurship 
and community building. Under his leadership, the university has become 
more accessible to students from all different backgrounds. Dr. 
Lovells impact is seen across campus; from the brand-new dorm to the 
new business school, he fought to make Marquette a world-class 
university.
. He never failed to make time for Marquettes 
students, attending hundreds of campus events and teaching classes. An 
avid runner, he could be seen jogging around campus. He was often 
joined by students through his running club, meeting weekly at the St. 
Joan of Arc Chapel on campus. If a student wanted to speak with him, 
all they needed to do was put on a pair of running shoes. He recognized 
the importance of listening and working closely with his fellow 
Wisconsinites to address difficult issues. Alongside his wife Amy, Dr. 
Lovell worked especially hard to address mental health issues in the 
wider community.
. As the 
first non-priest to become Marquette University president, Dr. Lovell 
held close the Jesuit values that guide Marquettes mission. He worked 
to connect all communities across Milwaukee and led by example, living 
a life dedicated to service.
  Let us pray for Dr. Lovells wife Amy and his children--Marissa, 
Matthew, Anna, and Kevin, and his many friends during this time of 
sorrow. There is no doubt that Dr. Lovells prodigious impact will 
continue to live on through the countless lives he positively impacted 
as a leader, educator and researcher. Godspeed.
Ismael Rivera is a senior organizer for the 
International Amalgamated Transit Union. He assists transit workers in 
learning the importance of joining a union among all the great benefits 
the union brings. He organizes the unorganized workers throughout 
Central Florida who are looking for a voice. Ismael served as vice 
president of ATU Local 1596 in Orlando and then was later voted in to 
become the first Latino president of the local. In 2013, Ismael 
established the ATU Latino Caucus, where he organized Latino workers in 
the workplace to be a voice for the Latino community at large as well 
as in the workplace. Ismael served as the southeast representative for 
the ATU International Latino Caucus from 2013 to 2016 and then became 
the ATU International Latino Caucus president from 2016 to 2024.
  Ismael was a bus operator for 27 years from 1997 to 2004. He started 
his career in transit as a bus operator in New York City. Ismael than 
moved to Central Florida in January 2004 and continued his career as a 
bus operator with the Central Florida Regional Transit Authority for 
the past 20 years.
  In 2017, after Hurricane Maria hit the Island of Puerto Rico, Ismael 
shipped a 53-foot container filled with food, water, and necessities 
for the people on the southern part of the island--a small town in the 
mountains called Tibes. This was made possible with the assistance of 
ATU International who paid for the shipping of the container.
  Ismael served on the Central Labor Council in Central Florida from 
2013 to 2024. Ismael represents ATU on the national board for the Labor 
Council for Latin American Advancement. On this board, he engages with 
members dealing with immigration issues in the workplace and abroad. 
Ismael and his wife, Maira, have been married for 36 years and have 
three children, Jose, Christina, and Daniel, as well as 12 precious 
grandchildren.
Lenna Donna Cadogan hails from Guyana, South 
America. Lenna received an academic scholarship from the government of 
Guyana to attend the Dental Auxiliary School in Jamaica, where she 
pursued advanced studies and graduated as a dental nurse. In 1980, she 
migrated to the United States and resided in Brooklyn, New York. She 
continued her studies at New York City Technical College, where she 
graduated as a dental hygienist. In 1988, she relocated with her family 
to Orlando, Florida, and was employed as a dental hygienist. She is 
currently retired after 30 years of service. Lenna has been married to 
her husband, Noel, for over 46 years and has two amazing children and 
four grandchildren, as well as a son-in-law and daughter-in-law.
  Lenna has been a member of the Caribbean and Floridian Association, 
Inc., since its inception 34 years ago. She has been a member of the 
Medical Committee serving the community in health fairs, and the 
Education Committee, which provides scholarships yearly to graduating 
students in Central Florida. She is currently the chairperson of the 
Fundraising and Entertainment Committee, a position she has held for 
many years. She is instrumental in coordinating one of the largest 
festivals, the Caribbean Fusion Festival, which is held annually in 
Kissimmee and attended by over 7,000 people who contribute greatly to 
the economy of the City of Kissimmee. She also organizes yearly bus 
rides to Fort DeSota Park, as well as the annual holiday party at 
Christmas for family, friends, and members of the community.
  Lenna is a woman of faith and is an active member of Solid Rock 
Community Church in Kissimmee. She is also the leader of the Greeters 
Ministry.
Maira Rivera is a certified educator employed 
as the dean of an elementary school in Orange County Public Schools. 
She is in the 30th year of her educational career, which began in New 
York working with students with special needs for 10 years. She then 
moved to Orlando in 2004, where she has taught kindergarten, was an 
exceptional student education staffing specialist, and a district 
program specialist.
  Maira earned her Bachelor of Arts in Psychology, Master of Science in 
Early Childhood Education, and Master of Education in Educational 
Leadership. In 2006, Maira was the recipient of the Lehman Urban 
Teacher Education Award in recognition of her achievement as an 
outstanding educator and alumna of Lehman College who exemplifies the 
ideals of their education programs in promoting justice, equity, and 
caring in urban education. That same year, Maira was also named as an 
Orange County Public Schools Teacher of the Year.
  In addition to her passion for helping students achieve academic and 
social-emotional success, she is also a member of many organizations 
that focus on helping the community with issues surrounding 
immigration, voter registration, affordable housing, fair wages, and 
better working conditions. Maira is on the executive board of the 
Florida AFL-CIO and the AFL-CIO Central Florida Labor Council. She is 
the treasurer of the Central Florida Labor Council for Latin American 
Advancement. Maira serves on the governance board of the Florida 
Education Association and is the vice president of the Orange County 
Classroom Teachers Association. She is a fierce advocate for all OCPS 
staff, students, and families.
  Maira was also a member of Vamos4PR and helped establish the Language 
Line Phone Interpreting Services, which provides translation in over 
240 languages for the diverse families of OCPS to be able to actively 
participate in their childs education. Mairas most treasured 
accomplishment is being married to her forever love, Ismael, for 36 
years. Together, they have three amazing children, Jose, Christina, and 
Daniel. They also have 12 precious grandchildren and enjoy spoiling 
them every chance they get.
Ms VELAZQUEZ. Mr. Speaker, I rise today to honor and celebrate Maria 
Antonia ``Tonita Cay and the 50th year anniversary of the Caribbean 
Social Club, which stands as the oldest Puerto Rican-owned Latino 
social club in Williamsburg, Brooklyn. She has been featured in 
numerous media outlets, publications, and a documentary. In the past 
years, notable artists, filmmakers, and musicians have visited Tonitas 
Caribbean Social Club to experience the unique essence of the rich 
Latino heritage it now represents.
  Tonita, as she is affectionately known, was born on May 10, 1940, in 
Junco, Puerto Rico. She is the second oldest of nine siblings. In 1956, 
during the significant migration of Puerto Ricans to New York City, her 
family settled in the Lower East Side when she was fifteen years old. 
Several years later, she moved to Williamsburg, where there was an 
established and growing Puerto Rican community and employment 
opportunities in the needlework factories that were part of New Yorks 
bustling garment industry. In addition to working as factory 
seamstress, Tonita began designing, sewing, and selling dresses from 
her home. This home-based business showcased her skills and helped 
support her and fulfill her dream of owning the building she lived in 
as a tenant. This established a foothold in her community and laid the 
foundation for the incorporation of her Caribbean baseball team and 
club in 1973 at 244 Grand Street in Brooklyn. Her courage and 
perseverance defied the societal norms of the time.
  Today, Tonita is one of Los Sures Williamsburgs Puerto Rican 
`Pioneras and the last women-owned social club. At a time when Puerto 
Ricans and Latinos were politically invisible in Williamsburg, Tonita 
helped elevate our presence and cultural identity by establishing the 
Caribbean Baseball teams, which gathered hundreds of players and their 
families weekly. Players and their families were proud of Roberto 
Clemente and wanted to emanate his game. Tonitas grit contributed to 
more Latino, and women owned social clubs and baseball leagues. During 
the 1970s and 1980s, the Southside of Williamsburg was flushed with 
gathering social clubs for baseball and dominoes. In the 1990s, the 
rising cost of rent and excessive demand on licensing by the city 
imposed significant hardship for many social clubs including Tonitas. 
However, she demonstrated remarkable resilience. Her determination was 
particularly evident when she took on City Hall and won, securing the 
clubs place in the community even as Mayor Rudy Giulianis 
administration cracked down on various venues.
  Tonitas victory was an achievement. Today, her continued legacy of 
community support remains steadfast. During the COVID-19 pandemic, she 
utilized the Caribbean Social Club to provide no cost essential 
assistance and home cooked meals to her neighbors and all who visited. 
The Caribbean Social Club is not only home to Puerto Ricans, but also 
welcoming place for a melting pot of different backgrounds, cultures 
and professions, reflecting Tonitas inclusive and welcoming spirit. 
Maria Antonia Cay and the Caribbean Social Club is the embodiment of 
the American dream. Her business acumen and sense of community has 
contributed greatly to the social and cultural fabric of the Los Sures 
community in Williamsburg.
, I urge my colleagues to join me in congratulating Maria 
Antonia Cay and the Caribbean Social Club on this special 50th Year 
Anniversary.
I rise today to recognize Eric Volta as 
he retires from his role as Superintendent of the Liberty Union High 
School District.
  Eric grew up in the Santa Clara Valley and graduated from Santa Clara 
High School. He went on to attend Stanford University, playing on 
Stanfords football team all four years of university and graduating 
with his BA in history. Throughout his career, Eric has worked 
tirelessly to support students and expand educational opportunities 
throughout the Bay Area. He worked in the Santa Clara Unified School 
District (SCUSD) teaching 9th through 12th graders and went on to serve 
as Vice Principal of Santa Clara High School.
  Eric and his family moved to Brentwood, California in 2000 and Eric 
joined the Liberty Union High School District (LUHSD). During his time 
with LUHSD, Eric served as assistant principal, high school principal, 
and Assistant Superintendent of Human Resources. He was promoted to 
Superintendent in 2011 where he has worked to support students and 
families. Eric has received a number of accolades for his work as an 
educator, receiving the ACSAs Superintendent of the Year for Region VI 
Award, the California Interscholastic Federation Distinguished Services 
Award, and the California Department of Educations Principal Award. 
Additionally, he served on the California School Boards Association 
Superintendents Advisory Council and is a current board member of the 
California High School Coalition.
  Eric is retiring from his position as superintendent after 13 years 
of dedicated service. Please join me in thanking Eric for his many 
contributions to the Liberty Union High School District and wishing him 
well as he begins his new role as superintendent of the Mountain View 
Los Altos Union High School District.
I rise to honor the Vietnam and Korean War 
veterans who will be traveling to Washington, D.C. on June 19, 2024, 
with Honor Flight Chicago, a program that provides WWII, Vietnam, and 
Korean War veterans the opportunity to visit their memorials on The 
National Mall in Washington, D.C. These memorials were built to honor 
their courage and service to their country.
  The American Veteran is one of our greatest treasures. The Soldiers, 
Airmen, Sailors, Marines, and Coast Guardsmen who traveled here on June 
19 answered our nations call to service during one of its greatest 
times of need. From the Pacific Asian Theatre to the Korean Theater, 
these brave Americans risked life and limb, gave service, and 
sacrificed much, all while embodying what it is to be a hero. We owe 
them more gratitude than can ever be expressed.
  I welcome these brave veterans to Washington and to their memorials. 
I am proud to include in the Record the names of these men and women 
for all to see, hear, and recognize, and I call on my colleagues to 
rise and join me in expressing gratitude:
  Michael J. Acosta, Richard Altosino, Arthur L. Andersen, Bruce J. 
Andersen, Danny E. Anderson, Jose L. Araoz, Ronald J. Baratono, Edward 
Bickham, Gregory A. Blomberg, Eric J. Blount Jr., James E. Bradley, 
Theodore S. Bragen, John E. Brey, Richard E. Brueckmann, Paul M. 
Bruzas, John K. Bulatek, Edward C. Bunting, Wayne H. Button, Paul A. 
Carlson, Robert A. Carpenter, John R. Carr, Frank C. Clarke, James K. 
Claydon, Richaid P. Corcoran, Jerome M. Corcoran, John R. Czerniak, 
Vincent J. Davi, Billye L. Davila, Warren R. DeJong, Frank Demke, 
Charles R. Denby, Louise A. Derifield, Paul L. Dillinger, James R. 
Doyle, Joseph R. Duffy, Clarence E. Dust, Frank E. Edelmann, John T. 
Ferriter, Dewaine E. Haag, Richard E. Hanson, Thomas C. Hill, Lloyd C. 
Howard, Paul Q. Ison, Juan P. Jacinto, Sandalo Jackson, Gregory S. 
Jacobs, James J. Jazo, Terence R. Jordan, Evaldas Kacinskas, Dennis 
Kleusner, Kenneth J. Kouba, Jerome W. Koutny, Leonard Kozlowski, 
Raymond J. Kraig, Kenneth G. Krupowicz, Jon N. Lacey, William Langle, 
Randy L. Larson, Carl W. Leep, Robert P. Legel, Dennis C. Lukaysky, 
Dennis J. Massar, Carl S. Mazur, Philip M. McCollum, Dennis W. 
McCusket, John M. McGeoghegan, Charles S. McGrady, Donald L. McNurlin, 
Timothy J. Mercer, Fred W. Meyer III, Richard Michiels, Kenneth J. 
Milowski, Donald J. Murphy, Gary R. Nelson, Richard C. OConnor, 
Kenneth J. Operzedek, Nick Paglia, Frederick J. Parsons, Jorge M. 
Perez, Lawrence Peterson, Renzo D. Piccoli, Richard E. Podemski, Jimmy 
C. Reed, Harold C. Rhea, Daniel L. Rittenhouse, Theodore Rosemann, John 
A. Roske, Ronald A. Ruttkay, Richard P. Schab, Robert C. Scofield, 
Leonard W. Seltzer, Monty L. Shannon, Michael E. Shelbert, Wayne W. 
Sherman, James D. Sienzant, Gerald T. Simon, Larry G. Smith, Richard D. 
Snyder, Daniel F. Sowonik, Richard J. Stankus, Stanley W. Stec, Gary H. 
Stieg, Thomas Stoll, David W. Stone, Daniel M. Synair, Gordon Tozier, 
Robert F. Vardell, Raymond F. Vicari, Robert W. Walker, Clarkson C. 
Wormer, IV, Raymond W. Wyban, John T. Zajac, and Frank Zanocco.
I missed Roll Call votes 261, 262, 263, 
264, 265, 266, 267, 268, 269, 270, 271, 272, 273, 274, and 275 on June 
13, 2024, due to illness. Had I been present, my votes would have been:
  Nay on Roll Call No. 261; Nay on Roll Call No. 262; Nay on Roll Call 
No. 263; Yea on Roll Call No. 264; Nay on Roll Call No. 265; Nay on 
Roll Call No. 266; Nay on Roll Call No. 267; Nay on Roll Call No. 268; 
Nay on Roll Call No. 269; Nay on Roll Call No. 270; Nay on Roll Call 
No. 271; Nay on Roll Call No. 272; Nay on Roll Call No. 273; Nay on 
Roll Call No. 274; and Nay on Roll Call No. 275.
it is my honor and pleasure to 
extend my personal congratulations and best wishes to an exceptional 
community leader and outstanding citizen, Mr. Jim Wallace, on his 
retirement as a distinguished news anchor at WALB News 10 in Albany, 
Georgia. Jims final day on-air will be June 26, 2024, and a party 
honoring his retirement and career will be held on June 18, 2024, in 
Albany, Georgia.
  Born and raised in North Georgia, Jim Wallace attended Towers High 
School in Decatur, Georgia, and graduated from the University of 
Georgia in 1976 with a degree in Broadcast Journalism.
  For over four decades, Jim has been a dependable and well-respected 
leader in Southwest Georgia. He has built quite an impressive career, 
which began in November 1976 when he joined WALB News 10, serving in 
both news and sports. He has served as a weekend Sports Anchor and 
Reporter, then as Sports Director. In September 2001, he began 
anchoring the evening newscasts, and in December 2016, Jims hard work 
and talent landed him the Lead Anchor role in the evenings.
  Throughout his career, Jim has accumulated numerous accolades. He has 
won the prestigious Georgia AP Sportscaster of the Year and Georgia AP 
Sports Reporter of the Year award on two separate occasions. Jim is 
also a Georgia AP Sports Photographer of Year award winner and holds 
numerous United Press International Sportscasting Awards. Along with 
his professional achievements, Jim also dutifully volunteers as a 
Sunday School teacher and youth volunteer at First United Methodist 
Church.
  Jim has accomplished much throughout his life, but none of it would 
have been possible without the Grace of God and the love and support of 
his wife, Tracy, and their two children, Jake and Shelly.
  Sir Winston Churchill often said ``You make your living by what you 
get, you make your life by what you give. Southwest Georgia is a 
better place because Jim Wallace gave his time and talents to keep our 
communities informed about the world around them. Jims passion and 
dedication to the news, as well as his broadcasting expertise, are 
unparalleled, but his heart for helping others is what has made his 
lifes work truly special.
  On a personal note, it has been a pleasure working with Jim during my 
time in public office. Over the years, Jim and I have sat down

for countless interviews and discussions on numerous topics which have 
been essential to informing the people of Georgia about the pressing 
issues we face as a state and as Americans. While I have no doubt that 
WALB News 10 will continue in its mission to inform the public, we will 
all certainly miss Jims adept reporting and insights.
, I ask my colleagues in the U.S. House of Representatives 
to join my wife, Vivian; and me, along with the more than 765,000 
people of Georgias Second Congressional District, in extending our 
sincerest appreciation and best wishes to Mr. Jim Wallace upon the 
occasion of his retirement from an outstanding four-decade career in 
broadcast journalism at WALB News 10.
I rise today to honor a trailblazer, 
philanthropist, and community leader. Kenneth B. Jarvis transitioned 
from this life on June 3, 2024. Though he no longer walks among us, his 
spirit will forever reside in the hearts of those who had the privilege 
of knowing him.
  Ken, as he was affectionately known, was born in 1934 in San 
Francisco, California. From a young age, Ken learned timeless values 
that he carried throughout his life: respect, fortitude, and leading by 
example. He graduated from Polytechnic High School and then enlisted in 
the United States Air Force.
  After his service with the Air Force, Ken returned to San Francisco 
and joined the United Parcel Service (UPS), where he made history as 
the companys first African American package car driver. Ken quickly 
rose through the ranks of UPS, relocating to Illinois and then Plano, 
Texas, where he was tasked with establishing the Southwest region of 
UPS. Throughout Kens 37-year career with UPS, he opened their doors to 
thousands of qualified and diverse applicants. Ultimately serving as 
the Vice President of Human Resources before retiring in 1994, he used 
his platform to promote inclusive policies and foster a culture of 
diversity and opportunity.
  Kens career advancements also provided him with the opportunity to 
further his commitment to community service. In Plano, he worked 
tirelessly to strengthen the fabric of the community by initiating 
programs aimed at fostering unity, inclusivity, and prosperity for all 
residents. In retirement, Ken served on various boards and committees, 
including Texas Health Resources, the Plano Symphony, and the Plano 
Police Civilian Review Board. Ken co-founded the Mutual Alliance 
Restoring Community Hope (MARCH) Foundation, which has provided over 
2,000 grants and scholarships for young African Americans entering 
Historically Black Colleges and Universities. After Kens wife, Kay, 
was diagnosed with Alzheimers disease, Ken began the H. Kay Jarvis 
Alzheimers Research Endowment to support research on the disease.
  Left to cherish his memory are his son, Kenneth B. Jarvis II; 
daughter, Michele Jarvis Kindred; granddaughter, Krystal N. Jarvis; 
grandson, Kenneth B. Jarvis III; great-granddaughter, Ariela Giles; and 
many more.
, I urge you and our colleagues to join me in honoring the 
life of Ken Jarvis. Ken was more than a leader; he was a source of 
inspiration for all who had the privilege of knowing him. Through his 
guidance and encouragement, he paved the way for countless individuals 
to achieve their dreams and aspirations. May we continue to cherish his 
memory for years to come.