I rise today in recognition of Kosovos 
Independence Day on February 17th. This date marks 16 years since 
Kosovo declared independence in 2008 after enduring years of conflict. 
Kosovo has since emerged as an independent democratic nation and today 
is one of the most valuable allies of the American people.
  In celebrating this occasion, I also celebrate the many Albanian-
Americans who have made Michigan their home. Our community continues to 
grow and foster immense cultural, economic, and creative growth 
throughout the State of Michigan. These families embody the values of 
freedom and democracy that represent the American Dream.
  Historically, Michigan itself has played a substantial--and proud--
role in Kosovos road to stability and democracy through the deployment 
of Michigan National Guard units to the region as peacekeeping forces.
  I am delighted to honor the independence of Kosovo alongside the 
vibrant and ever-growing Albanian-American community that calls 
Michigan its home. Kosovos remarkable transition into sovereignty, 
alongside our states everlasting bonds with the Albanian-American 
people, represents the power of democracy both at home and abroad. The 
shared principles between our two nations truly represent the ideals 
that have turned our connection into economic prowess, shared defense, 
and international cooperation.
, I ask all my colleagues to join me in commemorating this 
wonderful occasion. Kosovos Independence Day allows us to reflect not 
only on the meaning of freedom, but also the Albanian-American 
contributions throughout Michigans Ninth District and the entire 
state.
I rise today to honor and celebrate Black 
History Month, a time dedicated to recognizing the contributions of 
African Americans to the rich tapestry of American history. This month 
serves as an opportunity to reflect on the achievements, struggles, and 
enduring resilience of the Black community.
  One noteworthy aspect of Black history that deserves recognition is 
the profound impact of African Americans on the world of music, 
particularly in the realm of jazz. Jazz, born from the African American 
experience, has become a universal language, transcending borders and 
connecting people from diverse backgrounds. It is a powerful expression 
of creativity, resilience, and cultural richness.
  In this context, Id like to emphasize the significant partnership of 
the Turkish Embassy and the Ertegun brothers. Sons of Turkeys first 
ambassador to the United States, Ahmet and Nesuhi believed in the power 
of music to bring people together. Beginning in 1940, musicians such as 
Duke Ellington, Johnny Hodges, ``Lead Belly, Teddy Wilson, Lester 
Young, and members of the Benny Goodman, Ellington and Count Basie 
orchestras performed at the Turkish Embassy. Their father insisted that 
in the embassy, all, regardless of color, be treated with dignity and 
respect.
  As co-founders of Atlantic Records, the Ertegun brothers were 
instrumental in bringing together artists from different backgrounds, 
breaking down racial and cultural barriers in the world of music. Ahmet 
traveled to New Orleans and Harlem to sign the greatest black musicians 
of the time, including Stick McGhee, The Harlemaires, and The Drifters. 
In the 1960s, Atlantic Records, often in partnerships with local labels 
like Stax Records in Memphis, helped to develop the growth of soul 
music, with artists such as Ben E. King, Solomon Burke, Otis Redding, 
Sam and Dave, Percy Sledge, Aretha Franklin, and Wilson Pickett.
  The Turkish Embassys commitment to hosting these jam sessions 
exemplifies the importance of cultural diplomacy and the unifying power 
of music. Through these events, artists of diverse backgrounds, 
including African American musicians, have had the opportunity to 
showcase their talents, bridging cultural gaps and promoting 
understanding.
  As we commemorate Black History Month, let us go beyond celebrating 
the achievements of the past but also recognize the importance of 
continued collaboration and dialogue to build a more harmonious future. 
The blending of Black history and jazz, coupled with the dedicated 
endeavors of entities such as the Turkish Embassy and the Ertegun 
brothers, stands as a powerful tribute to the transformative potential 
of cultural interchange and the unifying power of music.
  I encourage my colleagues to join me in acknowledging the 
significance of Black History Month, celebrating the contributions of 
African Americans to the arts and culture, and recognizing the positive 
impact of initiatives like the Turkish Embassy-hosted jam sessions in 
fostering unity and understanding.
on February 14, during Roll Call No. 44, I 
recorded my vote as Present. The reason for my vote is as follows:
  All acts of sexual violence are horrific. We should all be fighting 
to end it here at home and all over the world.
  So, while this resolution rightly denounces any sexual committed by 
Hamas, I am disturbed that it completely ignores and erases any sexual 
abuse and violence committed by Israeli forces against Palestinians, 
especially children.
  War crimes cannot justify more war crimes. We must stand up for 
everyones safety and human rights, no matter their faith or ethnicity.
  There are numerous, well-documented reports of sexual violence, 
including rape, committed by Israeli forces against Palestinians in 
their custody. Children detained and stripped to their underwear in 
public, for the world to see.
  The UN and human rights groups have raised alarms for years--but 
Congress has never cared.
  We all have a responsibility to denounce sexual violence in all 
forms, regardless of who is responsible. This resolution falls well 
short of that responsibility.
, outreach was made to the sponsor of H. Res. 966 on 
several occasions to support the inclusion of Palestinians who had been 
victims of sexual violence into the Resolution. However, the sponsor 
denied adding in any language that supports the well-documented fact 
that Palestinians have faced many atrocities similar to those described 
in the Resolution. Sexual violence is abhorrent and must be fully 
investigated and prosecuted. The intentional omission of Palestinian 
lived experiences in this resolution is dehumanizing and a disservice 
to survivors everywhere.
Abigail Ellis is currently a registered mental 
health counselor intern, a devoted mental health advocate, a mentor, 
and an educator. She is steadfast in her commitment to effecting 
positive change in her community.
  Raised in Moore Haven, Florida, she developed a passion for community 
service early on--learning from her grandmother, Ida M.

Ward, who was always giving back. Abigail earned a bachelors degree in 
business and information management from Seminole State College, 
complemented by certificates in project management and human resource 
administration. Her academic journey culminated in a masters degree in 
clinical mental health counseling from Nova Southeastern University.
  In 2001, Abigail made history as the first African-American Chalo 
Nitka Pageant winner in her hometown, Moore Haven, Florida. This 
accomplishment not only showcased her resilience but also set a 
powerful precedent for others to follow. Abigail and her son, Lamar 
Allen, are deeply engaged in community service. She founded Steps 
Foundation, Inc., a nonprofit organization established in 2019 to serve 
marginalized youth in Osceola County.
  The organization was born after years of watching her mother, Darlene 
Ellis, struggle to find resources to support her brother, Samuel Ellis. 
Through this initiative, she has demonstrated a proactive and hands-on 
approach to addressing the unique challenges faced by underserved 
teens.
  In addition to her foundation, Abigail actively serves on several 
boards throughout Central Florida, focusing on mental health, community 
engagement, and youth development. She serves as a member of Chi Sigma 
Iota, the Florida Counseling Association, and the Osceola Chamber, just 
to name a few. This involvement underlines her dedication to a holistic 
approach in supporting the well-being of adolescents. Abigail Ellis 
exemplifies leadership, compassion, and expertise, utilizing her 
multifaceted role to create a positive impact on the lives of young 
people and their families.
  On February 22, 2024, Abigail Ellis was honored as a distinguished 
leader in Central Florida for Black History Month.
during a run in Orlando in 2013, Briana Daniel 
encountered the stark reality of homelessness. Motivated to help but 
inexperienced in addressing this issue, she chose to immerse herself by 
living among the Downtown Orlando homeless community for over a month.
  Through firsthand experience and conversations with them, she 
discovered their profound need for dignity through cleanliness. This 
insight led her to establish Street Team Movement Inc., an organization 
dedicated to offering hygiene services to the homeless community.
  ``Its hard to have dignity or feel like you have value when you have 
nowhere to wash and no way to clean your clothes or yourself, said 
Daniel.
  Street Team Movement Inc. provides laundry services to the unhoused 
and hygiene items distributed through their hygiene vending machines. 
The machines are accessible for free to the homeless through their 
proprietary ``Hope Cards, which are special access cards allowing the 
population a limited number of transactions per week.
  ``We believe in compassionate assistance, not just handouts. The 
`Hope Card allows us to help without enabling dependency. We provide 
individuals the means to access items, and services while preventing 
any misuse, said Daniel.
  In 2021, Street Team Movement launched a special program specifically 
for homeless women called Project Lioness. The program aims to bridge 
the hygiene gap for unhoused

women by connecting them to critical feminine hygiene kits that will 
carry them through their monthly cycle. To date, Project Lioness has 
distributed over 1,000 hygiene kits stocked with panty liners, feminine 
napkins, tampons, and wipes. To date, Street Team Movement has washed 
over 30,000 loads of laundry, provided over 500 haircuts, and has given 
out over one million hygiene items. Since launching the hygiene vending 
machines in 2020, Street Team Movement has given out over 5,000 hygiene 
kits in five States.
  On February 22, 2024, Briana Daniel was honored as a distinguished 
leader in Central Florida for Black History Month.
HONORING CLAY FIRE TERRITORY CHIEF TIMM SCHABBELS CAREER IN SERVANT 
                               of indiana
it is my honor to recognize and congratulate 
Chief Timm Schabbel, who recently retired as Fire Chief of the Clay 
Fire Territory in South Bend, Indiana, after 35 impressive years with 
the department.
  During his nearly four decades in public safety, Timm has served in 
different roles within the fire department, including as a firefighter, 
Engineer, Lieutenant, Chief of Operations, and Fire Chief. Timm was 
promoted to Fire Chief in 1997, making him the longest tenured chief 
officer in the agencys 75-year history.
  Under Chief Schabbels leadership, Clay Fire became the first 
internationally accredited fire department in Indiana. In addition, 
Clay Fire also expanded under Chief Schabbels tenure, essentially 
tripling the area the department covers. These achievements were only 
possible thanks to Timms vision and determination.

  On February 23, 2024, page E175, in the first column, the 
following appeared: . . . fire department in Indiana. In addition, 
Clay Fire also expanded under Chief Schdbbels tenure, essentially 
tripling the area the department covers. These achievements were 
only . . .
  
  The online version has been corrected to read: . . . fire 
department in Indiana. In addition, Clay Fire also expanded under 
Chief Schabbels tenure, essentially tripling the area the 
department covers. These achievements were only . . .

  The many awards and accolades he has received over the years--
including Firefighter of the Year from Clay Township, Fire Chief of the 
Year from the state of Indiana, the Presidents Award from the 
International Association of Fire Chiefs, and the Sagamore of the 
Wabash award--are all a testament to Timms commitment to excellence 
and an accomplished career spent in the service to others.
  The broader South Bend community and St. Joseph County are 
unquestionably better off and safer thanks to this good man who 
exemplifies what it means to be a leader and a true public servant.
  Timms example and leadership are also reminders that first 
responders are on the frontlines of some of the most difficult 
situations our communities face. When there is a problem, first 
responders like Timm answer the call and willingly put themselves in 
harms way to keep us safe, and for that all of us are extremely 
grateful.
  I am proud to join so many Hoosiers throughout Indianas Second 
District in expressing our appreciation to Chief Schabbel for his 
service and in wishing him and his family all the best going forward 
during Timms very well-deserved retirement. I thank Timm.
HONORING FRANCIS `FRANK HUMMEL, JR.
I rise today to honor the 
selfless service and incredible accomplishments of Francis `Frank 
Hummel, Jr., a United States Army Veteran, who passed earlier this 
month.
  Born and raised in Philadelphia, Frank spent his adult life in 
southern New Jersey. In December 1950, he joined the United States Army 
where he completed his basic training on Joint Base McGuire-Dix-
Lakehurst, right in his own backyard. Frank was then transferred to a 
small town in Germany where he went through military intelligence 
training and served in the Army Security Agency. During this time, 
Frank enjoyed boxing, playing center and linebacker for the Seventh 
Army Special Troops Ramblers football team, and being a member of the 
97th Signal Satans basketball team. Today, we all remember him for his 
brave service, and love for sports with his fellow soldiers.
  After the Army, Frank opened his own mechanical engineering firm, 
Hummel Engineering Corporation, which served New Jersey, Pennsylvania, 
New York, and Delaware. Frank also served as the Executive Vice 
President and then President of the Mechanical Contractors Association 
of Eastern Pennsylvania, and was the Secretary of the National 
Certified Pipe Welding Bureau of Philadelphia. Beyond that he was a 
member of the Christian Business Mens Association, where he helped 
mentor young men to succeed in their faith, business, and lifes 
endeavors. Frank also taught project management at the Pennsylvania 
State University, Media campus.
  A man of faith, Frank was an active member of his congregations and 
served on many church boards throughout the years. Formerly a member of 
Cherry Hill Baptist Church, he most recently was a member of Grace 
Baptist Church in Mount Laurel. Frank was active in supporting 
Christian mission work around the world and was an author in the Wiley 
Mission Community Newspaper.
  Frank was not only a veteran, entrepreneur, and man of faith, he was 
a family man who loved spending time with his large family. He was 
known to spend his time visiting historical societies, libraries, and 
cemeteries across the United States and Europe where he listened to and 
learned about histories from ancestors and distant family members. He 
enjoyed recording family genealogy by hand, writing stories about his 
life experiences, and photography.
  Frank married Lorraine Miller in 1951 and in their over 70 years of 
marriage, they had three children, eleven grandchildren, and nine 
great-grandchildren.
  While many community members locally know Frank and his positive 
impact in our community, today Im proud to honor his tenure as a 
veteran of the United States Army, and husband, father, grandfather, 
and great-grandfather. We are lucky to have his inspiration in our 
community.
Ms. Nealya Iris Brunson is the dance director 
for the Osceola County School for the Arts, where she has dedicated 20 
years to educating students in dance and the arts. Some of her 
contributions to student success include attending the National High 
School Dance Festivals in Miami and Philadelphia, as well as the 
Regional High School Dance Festivals in Norfolk, Virginia, where 
students received college acceptances and scholarships. Additional 
contributions include attending the Florida Dance Education 
Organization and Florida Dance Performance Assessment, where students 
in middle and high school received superior and excellent ratings in 
the areas of dance, technique, and performance. Over the years, Ms. 
Brunson has taught many students who have demonstrated outstanding 
achievements and have become professional dancers, artists, teachers, 
and choreographers nationally and internationally.
a dance program coordinator, choreographed 
dances for many dance and theater programs, and served as a dance 
adjudicator in several public schools, universities, and performing 
arts centers, primarily in the state of Florida.
B.J.s School of Dance in 
St. Petersburg, Florida, under the direction of Barbara Hodges. She 
continued to study dance at the Pinellas County School for the Arts at 
Gibbs High School and at St. Petersburg College, CoMotion Dance 
Theater. Ms. Brunson received a Bachelor of Fine Arts in Dance from the 
University of Florida, New World School of the Arts in Miami, Florida, 
under the direction of Daniel Lewis. She also received a Master of Arts 
in Dance from the American University in Washington, D.C., under the 
direction of Dr. Niama Prevots.
, which is a major 
component of her dance classes. She will be releasing her first book 
titled, ``Goals of Dance Technique: A Dancers Workbook, later this 
year.
  On February 22, 2024, Nealya Iris Brunson was honored as a 
distinguished leader in Central Florida for Black History Month.
it is with the fondest of memories and the 
heaviest of hearts that I rise today to remember author, educator, and 
my dear friend, Robie Harris, who we lost earlier this year. Robie was 
an extraordinary woman--a fierce defender of free speech, a dedicated 
teacher, an inspiring author, as well as a loyal friend and devoted 
wife and mother. Hers is a remarkable legacy as an advocate for 
children that will continue to inspire many.
  Born in Buffalo, New York, Robie discovered her love for the written 
word very early in life. As she told it, at just six years old she 
``published her first work, Robies Stories, an assignment from her 
kindergarten teacher. It was comprised of pictures and journal memories 
that each child produced every day that were then compiled into a book 
at the end of the year. As Robie grew up, so did her love of reading, 
writing, and learning--so much so that she would go on to dedicate her 
professional life to them.
  Robie went on to become the editor of both her high school newspaper 
as well as her college yearbook. Alter earning her undergraduate degree 
at Wheaton College, Robie moved to New York City where she initially 
found work at the United Nations. However, she knew that this was not 
her passion, so she pursued a teaching degree at Bank Street College of 
Education. Following the completion of her degree from Bank Street, she 
became an elementary school teacher at the Bank Street School for 
Children, where she taught writing and later directed after-school 
programs in the schools new Head Start program.
  It was through her work with children, as well as the experience of 
watching her own children and nieces and nephews grow up, that Robie 
found a voice as a childrens book author. She was inspired by the many 
questions and curiosities she heard from them and made it her mission 
to write and produce books that would help them navigate the many 
changes they would experience as they moved from one stage of 
development to the next. Robies first book, a collaborative effort 
with fellow author and friend, Elizabeth Levy was Before You Were 
Three: How You Began to Walk, Talk, Explore, and Have Feelings, and her 
first solo books included the picture books Dont Forget to Come Back 
and I Hate Kisses.
  Over the course of her writing career, Robie maintained her 
commitment to writing nonfiction, age-appropriate books, writing more 
than thirty titles that covered a multitude of topics including 
engineering, architecture, nutrition, math, death, and genetics. But it 
was her groundbreaking work, Its Perfectly Normal: Changing Bodies, 
Growing Up, and Sexual Health, a guided preadolescent children on 
puberty, their changing bodies, sexuality, and sexual health, that was 
not only her most successful, but also drove Robies fierce advocacy 
for free speech. While praised by medical professionals, child 
development specialists, and educators for its accuracy, reliability 
and for offering children clear guidance on the topic, as well as 
having been translated into 27 languages and sold one million copies, 
and having been updated numerous times, including a 25th anniversary 
edition; this title has ranked among the most frequently challenged and 
banned books in the country according to the American Library 
Association.
  Robie was an active member of PEN America, an organization that works 
to protect free expression in the United States and worldwide and 
champion the freedom to write because they understand the 
transformational power of words. Robie was a founding member of PEN 
Americas Childrens and Young Adults Books Committee and she was known 
for her calm, tactful, yet staunch and unwavering advocacy for the 
freedom of expression. In an essay for PEN, Robie once wrote, ``I write 
books for children because in some small way I hope that they will find 
the words I write useful, reassuring, interesting, and at times 
humorous and also in some small way help them to stay emotionally and/
or physically healthy by giving honest, accurate, up-to-date, and age-
appropriate information. Robie was fearless in her defense of her 
work and that of other writers. She once said in an interview, ``This 
to me is the bottom line on freedom of expression. As a reader, you 
have the right to speak out for or against whatever you read. As a 
writer, I have the right to write whatever I want to write--and I am 
just not going to stop.
  Robies passion for working with children, particularly in early 
childhood development, was a shared mission. Her husband, Bill Harris, 
is the founder of KidsPac, a group that helped to focus legislators at 
every level of government on the importance of early childhood 
education. For more than two decades KidsPac was a leader and respected 
voice in the advocacy for policies concerning childcare, prenatal 
health, and early education. Robie and Bills activism was integrated 
into every facet of their lives, so it is no surprise that both of 
their sons, David and Ben, both followed in their footsteps. David, 
taking a page from his fathers work, has focused his professional life 
on research and advocacy for policies that address child poverty. Ben, 
whose interests more mirrored Robies, is now Clinical Professor at the 
Psychological Center at The City College of New York (CCNY), which 
provides low-to-moderate-cost services to the CCNY and West Harlem 
communities. In this role, and throughout his career, he has worked 
with a socioeconomically and culturally diverse range of children and 
adolescents as well as adults.
  I found a kindred spirit in Robie. She never stopped, and she never 
took no for an answer. I will forever be grateful for the friendship, 
humor, and generosity she bestowed on me over the years. Illustrator 
and dear friend, Michael Emberly probably described her best when he 
said of Robie, ``She was smart and sensitive, kind, and generous beyond 
reckoning. She was a complicated human being in the best sense, and she 
had one of the best attributes you can say about a human being--she was 
memorable. I extend my heartfelt condolences to her husband, Bill, 
and her sons, David and Ben. Though we all feel that she was taken from 
us too soon, Robie Harris touched countless lives and she will be 
deeply missed by all those who knew her.
I rise today to honor the tremendous 
life of Gunner Anthony Vignaroli who passed away on February 6, 2024. 
Tony made service to his country and the state of Iowa his lifes 
calling.
  Following his graduation from Saydel High School, Tony embarked on a 
life of dedicated service. He served our country valiantly in the 
Vietnam War and then worked at Valley View Village as a Maintenance 
Supervisor.
  Many knew him for his work as a volunteer for the Department of 
Public Safety at the Iowa State Fair, where he helped with security 
efforts. I was honored to work directly with Tony to enhance Iowa State 
Fair safety for more than a million visitors by acquiring a security 
tower for the midway.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in recognizing Tony 
Vignaroli and the terrific impact he had on his community. I join his 
family and those closest to him in mourning his loss. May his memory 
never be forgotten.
Yokeenba Jenkins was born and raised in 
Osceola County, where he attended elementary, middle, and high school, 
graduating from Osceola High School.

  He spent his college years at Bethune Cookman University. Following 
his college years, Yokeenba found his passion for music, becoming one 
of the biggest DJs in the urban industry.
  When he was not on tour, he would spend his time coaching youth 
football at the age of 18 and volunteering his time at Chambers Park, 
where he is now a recreation supervisor.
  Yokeenba is a child of God, husband, father, mentor, community 
spokesperson, and leader. Yokeenba is a person with a passion for 
shaping the youth in his community. He is hard working, dependable, has 
great energy, and has a drive to see his programs succeed. He is always 
willing to help out wherever needed and assist his fellow co-workers, 
family, and community in any way possible.
  He is a dedicated individual who displays an enormous sense of pride 
in his daily work. Since taking on his role at the Chambers Park 
Community Center, he has been instrumental in creating some well 
attended recreation programs while maintaining a successful summer camp 
program where a large portion of the community benefits from. In 
addition, he has organized essential events that promote fellowship 
within the community, such as Breakfast with Santa, Daddy and Daughter 
Dance, and Back to School Jam, among others.
  He has done an excellent job of stepping right into the role and 
ensuring its continued success. He is an excellent team player and 
works very well with diverse populations of families, participants, 
employees, and co-workers who visit his facility daily. He is a capable 
and independent leader who takes pride in being an active member of the 
Kissimmee community.
  On February 22, 2024, Yokeenba Jenkins was honored as a distinguished 
leader in Central Florida for Black History Month.
I rise today to honor the life of 20-
year-old Alexa Bartell from Arvada, Colorado.
  Alexas friends and family knew her as an outgoing, compassionate, 
and energetic young woman, saying she could light up the room with her 
infectious personality. She loved basketball, music, and connecting 
with others. Tragically, Alexas life was cut short in April of 2023 by 
an act of reckless endangerment when she was driving near her hometown. 
Everyone who was fortunate to meet Alexa could see how intelligent, 
funny, and kind she was, and this tragedy took away her bright future.
  On behalf of the people of Colorados Seventh Congressional District, 
we honor the life of Alexa Bartell and continue to send support and 
love to her family and friends. In remembering Alexa, we not only mourn 
her passing, but also celebrate the joy and warmth she brought into the 
lives of those around her.
I rise today in recognition of Rare Disease 
Day on February 29, 2024. According to the Federal Drug Administration, 
over 7,000 rare diseases affect more than 30 million people in the 
United States. Thats nearly one in every ten Americans.
  The National Institutes of Health recognizes more than 7,000 rare 
diseases. Of those 7,000 plus diseases approximately 95 percent have no 
treatment. Instead, many patients receive treatments that are not 
approved by the FDA for their specific conditions. This treatment 
process can lead to patients experiencing difficulty with insurance 
reimbursements. All Americans deserve quality access to affordable 
health care, and we must do more to assist our fellow Americans with 
rare diseases in reaching these standards.
  Rare diseases not only have a debilitating impact on the individuals 
affected but also the families and loved ones who support them. On 
average, individuals with rare diseases do not receive an accurate 
diagnosis for more than four and a half years, in addition to 
difficulty in finding medical experts and treatments for their 
conditions. This leaves patients, families, and caregivers waiting 
indefinitely for diagnoses, treatments, and additional support for 
indefinite periods of time.
  Rare Disease Day is a significant step in increasing public awareness 
and encouraging funding for research into these conditions. It is 
critical that Congress continue to partner with patients, advocates, 
scientists, and health care employees to seek solutions that will 
prioritize public funding for the health, wellness, and treatment for 
all those impacted by rare medical conditions.
  On behalf of my constituents in New Hampshires First Congressional 
District, I want to commemorate this important day and remind my fellow 
Americans to recognize those impacted by rare diseases, in addition to 
the medical professionals committed to finding treatments for them.
I rise today to recognize our Texas-24 
Hometown Hero, Caden Leonard. As a sophomore at Southlake Carroll High 
School, Caden has made waves in the cross-country world. After winning 
the Class 6A individual state title and leading the Dragons to the 6A 
team championship, he went on to lift his team to a bronze medal at the 
Nike Cross Nationals (NXN) final. In qualifying for the NXN, he clocked 
a personal best, walking away with bronze and First Team All-Region 
recognition at Nike Cross Regionals South.
  Not only is Caden an exceptional athlete, hes also a servant in the 
community, volunteering with the Young Mens Service League, the local 
branch of the Special Olympics, and serving in youth ministry at 
Whites Chapel Methodist Church. Cadens dedication to academics, 
athletics, and public service led Gatorade to name him as Texas 2024 
Boys Cross Country Player of the Year.
  Congratulations to Caden on his incredible accomplishments and well-
deserved recognition. I look forward to following his cross-country 
career and cheering him on.