I rise today in commemoration of the 75th 
Anniversary of New Mexico Press Women. 75 years ago, New Mexico Press 
Women was founded by women committed to expanding opportunities in 
journalism for women. New Mexico Press Women is New Mexicos oldest, 
largest, and most diverse womens press organization.
  New Mexico Press Women will celebrate its 75th Anniversary Conference 
in just a few days. Countless members--both men and women--have left 
their marks on the communications professions. New Mexico Press Women 
will honor and profile courageous communicators at its 75th Anniversary 
Conference.
  New Mexico Press Women encourages excellence through its professional 
communications contest and through its annual Zia Award, which honors 
outstanding woman authors who personally or whose book has a connection 
to New Mexico. New Mexico Press Women has provided encouragement and 
real assistance to college students entering communications professions 
by awarding thousands of dollars in scholarship funds over the years.
  Through monthly luncheons, statewide conferences, and legislative 
workshops, New Mexico Press Women and its geographic chapters have 
brought together major players in New Mexicos history. New Mexico 
Press Womens gatherings have served as a forum for informing 
communicators and the public about the implications of current events.
  New Mexico Press Womens 75th anniversary is a significant milestone, 
and I am proud to extend my congratulations to all of its members 
during the 75th Anniversary Conference.
I rise today to honor a specia] man, Glendell 
Bennett of Lexington, Kentucky. Mr. Bennett celebrated his 100th 
birthday on March 2, 2024.
When he was in high school, World War II broke 
out. He and a friend heard about the all-Black regiment that was 
training in Alabama, so they jumped on a train and headed to Tuskegee 
to volunteer. They worked clearing brush for landing strips and working 
on aircraft maintenance. Mr. Bennett was later drafted into the Army 
and sent to Fort Eustis in Virginia, then to Europe. He served with the 
Quartermaster Truck Company and the Red Ball Express in France, 
delivering goods and ammunitions to those on the front lines. He served 
in the Army from 1943 to 1947.
  When World War II ended, Mr. Bennett attended Prairie View A&amp;M 
College in Houston. He farmed and later moved to Chicago. While in 
Chicago, he worked with civil rights leaders, including the Rev. Dr. 
Martin Luther King, Jr., to promote equality and justice. Mr. Bennett 
has nine children and three stepchildren. In 2012, he moved to 
Lexington, KY to be near his children Glenda Bennett Mulder, Kimberly 
Bennett, Brian Bennett, and Diane Minniefield. Mr. Bennett worked with 
the Kentucky Senior Employment Program at the Gainesway Community 
Center and the Goodwill Industries store for several years.
a loving, giving person. He and his fellow 
veterans are true heroes. As members of the ``Greatest Generation, 
they willingly served to protect and defend the freedoms that we enjoy 
today. I am humbled to honor Mr. Glendell Bennett and celebrate his 
100th birthday before the United States Congress.
I rise today to celebrate the 50th 
Anniversary of The Arc Nassaus founding. On this remarkable milestone, 
we commemorate five decades of service and their commitment to 
enhancing the lives of adults with intellectual and developmental 
differences in Northeast Florida.
  The Arc Nassaus vision of education and motivation is realized 
through life skills training, vocational opportunities, and long-term 
employment. These programs provide the individuals with a sense of 
belonging in their community.
  As we celebrate The Arc Nassaus impressive tenure, let us look 
towards the future with a renewed commitment to their mission. In this 
spirit, I am pleased to announce that The Arc Nassau and Northeast 
Florida Advocates for Autism and Related Disabilities have merged to 
strengthen their long-standing services to the community,
  Northeast Florida, let us follow The Arc Nassaus example, and see 
the able, not the label.
  I ask my colleagues to join me today in recognizing The Arc Nassau. 
Heres to another fifty years of impact, progress, and transformation.
I rise today to honor the memory of a 
beloved member of our community, Tom Kamerling. On Tuesday, we lost a 
true legend, a man whose voice resonated through the halls of Arkansas 
Tech Univerity for many years. Toms contributions to our community, 
both on and off the airwaves, will be forever cherished and remembered.
  As the public address voice of the Arkansas Tech Wonder Boys and 
Golden Suns, Tom was more than just a broadcaster; he was the 
embodiment of professionalism and dedication. His voice became 
synonymous with Tech athletics, guiding fans through countless 
memorable moments with his unmistakable tone and unrivaled passion for 
the game.
  His impact extended far beyond the broadcasting booth. Toms kindness 
and generosity touched the lives of everyone he encountered. Whether as 
a mentor to aspiring broadcasters or as a friend to those in need, he 
always went above and beyond to make a positive difference.
  His unwavering faith and commitment to serving others serve as an 
inspiration to us all. Even in his absence, his spirit will continue to 
guide and uplift our community for generations to come.
  My thoughts and prayers are with Toms family and loved ones during 
this difficult time. May they find solace in the knowledge that his 
legacy will live on in the hearts of all who knew him. In honor of his 
memory, let us strive to embody the same kindness, professionalism, and 
unwavering faith that defined Tom Kamerlings life.
due to a delayed elevator in 
the Capitol, I missed voting on Amendment No. 6 to H.R. 2799, the 
Expanding Access to Capital Act.
  Had I been present, I would have voted NAY on Roll Call No. 73.
to celebrate Womens History 
Month, I want to highlight Dr. Daisy Cocco De Filippis. She is the 
President and leader of Hostos Community College who has more than 
earned all our heartfelt admiration and thanks for her tireless work in 
administration and academia.
  Dr. Cocco De Filippis work in higher education began with her role 
as Provost and Senior Vice President of Student Affairs at Hostos 
Community College in 2002, where her unwavering commitment to 
compassion shaped the lives and academic careers of her students until 
her departure in 2008, when she took on the role of President at 
Naugatuck Valley Community College in Waterbury, Connecticut. She 
served this institution for twelve years, inspiring students to new 
academic heights.
  She inspired these students with her own work and her own academic 
journey. Dr. Cocco De Filippis herself graduated summa cum laude from 
Queens College, with a Bachelors in English and Spanish Literature, 
and then went on to pursue a Master of Arts in Spanish Literature, 
again from Queens College. Dr. Cocco De Filippis didnt stop there: she 
pursued a Master of Philosophy in Spanish Literature and a Ph.D. in 
Latin American Literature from the City University of New York Graduate 
Center. She was also the first person of Dominican ancestry to do so, 
cementing her legacy as a legendary pioneer in Dominican womens 
studies, Caribbean, and Dominican Diaspora literatures. For her work in 
these fields, she was awarded an honorary doctorate from the University 
of Santo Domingo, the oldest university in the Americas. Dr. Cocco De 
Filippis resume is no doubt an inspiration to her students, just as it 
is an inspiration to me.
  Dr. Cocco De Filippis returned to Hostos Community College in 2020 as 
President and led the school through the unprecedented COVID-19 
pandemic, navigating the difficult world of online learning and 
community preparedness with grace and hope. Hostos College reported 
significant advancements under her leadership. A myriad of impactful 
initiatives aimed at improving student life and accessibility have been 
implemented during her tenure, positively impacting both enrollment and 
retention. In early 2023, Hostos College unveiled a brand-new, cutting-
edge research center established due to the generous donations garnered 
under Dr. Cocco De Filippis leadership, which has allowed members of 
the Hostos faculty to explore new and more effective ways of teaching, 
all with the goal of improving Hostos learning environment for 
students and professors alike.
  We are honored to recognize Dr. Cocco De Filippis leadership and her 
achievements today. Her contributions have been invaluable to the lives 
of many, and we thank her for her relentless dedication to empowering 
others through education.
today I recognize the Borough of White 
Haven, Pennsylvania, in honor of its bicentennial celebration. The 
Borough of White Haven is situated on the eastern edge of Luzerne 
County and borders the beautiful Lehigh River at the entrance of the 
Pocono Mountains.
  White Haven was founded as a settlement in 1824, making it the oldest 
established community in this area of Luzerne County. Incorporated as a 
Borough in 1842, White Haven was named after Josiah White, an 
enterprising citizen and builder of the old-fashioned ``bear trap 
locks that made the Lehigh River navigable.
  The early settlers could not have predicted the immense importance of 
White Haven in Pennsylvanias--and the nations--economic growth and 
industrialization efforts. By the 1840s, anthracite coal mining was 
booming in the nearby Wyoming Valley and White Haven would become a 
central trade hub. A railroad was built from the Wyoming Valley to 
White Haven, where the canal system allowed the coal to be carried to 
market on barges. The Borough also boasted Pennsylvanias busiest 
lumber depots at the time, producing 20 million feet of lumber annually 
at its peak.
  Today, White Haven is a quaint town featuring a main street with 
shops and restaurants and lovely tree-lined streets. It also serves as 
a recreational hub with the Lehigh Gorge State Park on its border and 
the Delaware and Lehigh Anthracite Trail in its downtown. With its 
picturesque views, charming architecture, and friendly residents, it is 
easy to see why so many choose to call White Haven home.
  White Haven played a critical role in Pennsylvanias history and the 
industrialization of our nation. Over the past two centuries, the 
Borough has demonstrated a commitment to persistence and progress, a 
trend which will no doubt continue and contribute to the prosperity of 
this treasured community for centuries to come.
I rise today to recognize Mr. Gary Nelson 
for his many years of public service to our community as he enters his 
retirement. As the Executive Director of the Port of Grays Harbor for 
nearly 24 years, Mr. Nelson has demonstrated unparalleled leadership 
and advocacy for the Grays Harbor community.
2000, when there were 
only 21 vessel calls handling 85,000 tons of cargo. When Mr. Nelson 
stepped into leadership, the Port of Grays Harbor, like many other 
communities in my district, had fallen on hard times when the timber 
industry took it on the chin. Some folks feared that good things 
couldnt happen in Grays Harbor County anymore.
  But not Gary. Under his visionary leadership over the last 24 years, 
the number of vessel calls increased nearly 500 percent, and the number 
of metric tons of cargo was up over 3 million in 2023.
  During his tenure at the Port of Grays Harbor, Mr. Nelson oversaw the 
diversification of the Ports revenue streams and business ventures. 
This includes the operations at Satsop Business Park and recreational 
facilities at Friends Landing. He oversaw more than $275 million in 
private investment throughout Port facilities, as weII as millions of 
dollars in federal and state grants to modernize and improve the 
Westport Marina, Marine Terminals in Aberdeen, and the Bowerman 
Airport, positioning the Port to accommodate current and future 
economic growth.
  Garys leadership will continue to impact the entire region for years 
to come. Put simply, because of Gary Nelson, there are people in Grays 
Harbor who now have jobs. Because of Gary Nelson, there are families 
that can now put food on the table. Because of Gary Nelson, the future 
for our region is brighter.
  Beyond his local impact, Mr. Nelson is a nationally recognized leader 
in the industry. He served as the Chair of the American Association of 
Port Authorities from 2019 to 2020, chaired the Washington Public Ports 
Association Legislative Committee, and served on the Pacific Northwest 
Waterways Association Executive Board.
, I applaud and thank Gary Nelson for his amazing tenure. 
Garys passionate and caring stewardship of the Port of Grays Harbor 
has impacted the future of the community and shown that not only can 
good things happen in Grays Harbor County--great things can. I wish him 
the best in his retirement. He will be sorely missed. I am pleased to 
recognize Mr. Gary Nelson in the United States Congress.
I rise today to recognize and 
honor two distinguished public servants, community leaders, and dear 
friends of longstanding, Georgia State Senator David E. Lucas and 
Macon-Bibb Commissioner Elaine Huckabee Lucas. Their collective service 
of over more than six decades to the people of Macon-Bibb, the State of 
Georgia and humankind was recognized on Sunday, March 10, 2024, at 5:00 
p.m. during a community celebration at the Saint Peter Missionary 
Baptist Church in Macon, Georgia.
  State Senator David E. Lucas was born to the union of the late David 
Lucas and Beatrice Poole Lucas, both educators on April 23, 1950 in 
Byron, Georgia. He graduated from Lanier High School in Bibb County in 
1968 and went on to earn a Bachelors Degree in Political Science from 
Tuskegee University, attended Atlanta Law School in 1980, and has been 
awarded an Honorary Doctorate from the Mercer University Medical 
School. At Tuskegee, he was on the 1971 SIAC Championship football team 
and after graduation in 1973, he returned home to Macon. In 1974, he 
was elected to the Georgia House of Representatives, becoming the 
youngest member of that body. He has tirelessly represented Bibb County 
and Middle Georgia in both the Georgia House and State Senate for 
almost 50 years, becoming the most senior member.
  Throughout his career Senator Lucas has fought for civil rights, 
voting rights and equal opportunity. He championed policies that uplift 
Georgias seniors and improve healthcare access and outcomes in urban 
and rural communities. In the General Assembly, he has served on 
committees crucial to the economic development and wellbeing of our 
state, including Insurance, Energy, Utilities, Telecommunication, 
Appropriations and Transportation. I was blessed to serve with him for 
16 years and can say without reservation, that there is no one who 
knows how to leverage the inner workings of state government for his 
constituents better than State Senator David Lucas.
  In addition to his public service, Senator Lucas is a self-employed 
independent Insurance Agent and owner of TBL Inc., an entertainment 
promotions business. He has been a social studies teacher, football, 
basketball, and tennis coach; owner of the Macon Chiefs semi-
professional football team and the Georgia Titans basketball team; and 
a charter member of the 100 Black Men of Macon-Middle Georgia. He has 
been married to the love of his life, Commissioner Elaine Huckabee 
Lucas for more than 47 years and reared four children--David, Jr., 
Aris, Leonard and Albert (deceased) with 13 grandchildren and five 
great-grandchildren.

  Commissioner Elaine Huckabee Lucas is a lifelong resident of Macon 
and the wife of Senator David Lucas. She is and has been his support 
and helpmate throughout their marriage, keeping him grounded during his 
numerous career and life pursuits. But, this ``Queen of East Macon is 
a monumental public servant in her own right. Born to the union of Ella 
Appling Huckabee and Leonard Huckabee, she graduated from Miller Senior 
High School, completed work in English at Macon Junior College and 
received her BS Degree, Magna Cum Laude from Savannah State College in 
Elementary Education. She earned a Masters Degree from Fort Valley 
State University and an Education Specialist Degree from Georgia 
College and State University. She is certified in early childhood 
education, middle grades, data collection and counseling. She taught 
elementary school for 18 years, was an elementary and high school 
counselor for 12 years, coordinated counseling and advisement for the 
Bibb County Teen Parent Center for 5 years, and after retirement, was 
counselor, graduation specialist and community service coordinator at 
the Hutching Career Center for 8 years.
  First elected to the Macon City Council in 1983, Commissioner Lucas 
has continued her uninterrupted elective service, making history as the 
first female commissioner of the Macon-Bibb Consolidated Government. 
She has served on key committees including Community Resources and 
Development; Appropriations; and Employee Development and Compensation. 
She served as President, Vice President and Treasurer of the Georgia 
Association of Black Elected Officials; The Macon Bibb Board of Health; 
Martin Luther King Commission; Cemetery Preservation Board; and the 
Recreation Planning Committee. Her prolific record portrays a champion 
for voting rights, civil rights and equal access to services for all 
citizens. She is a founding member and first president of the Bibb 
County Voter Registration and Education League, member of NAACP, SCLC, 
Bibb County Democratic Executive Committee, and Golden Life Member of 
Delta Sigma Theta Sorority, Inc.
  In 2011, she opened EL High School Academy where over 1,800 school 
dropouts have reentered school and earned their high school diplomas. 
She is a 40-year blood donor, organ donor, and runs E. Lucas Consulting 
and Lennys Handy Services in partnership with her son, Lenny.
  Commissioner Elaine Lucas and Senator David Lucas are indeed a power 
couple and truly icons in the Middle Georgia area. Active members of 
Steward Chapel AME Church, they are indeed persons of faith. Moreover, 
they are my trusted friends of longstanding for over 50 years. It has 
been said that ``You make your living by what you get. You make your 
life by what you give! David and Elaine Lucas have truly made their 
lives by giving so much to so many for so long.
, I ask my colleagues in the House of Representatives to 
join my wife, Vivian, and me, along with the 765,000 people of 
Georgias Second Congressional District in recognizing and honoring the 
careers, service and legacies of State Senator David E. Lucas and 
Commissioner Elaine Huckabee Lucas. To God be the glory for the things 
they have done in support of humanity.
today Im proud to recognize a remarkable 
young constituent, Thomas Cong from Ossining, New York, for becoming a 
top 40 finalist in the Regeneron Science Talent Search, the Nations 
premier science competition for high school seniors.
  This achievement places Thomas among the brightest young minds in our 
country, continuing a tradition of excellence that has propelled alumni 
to the highest echelons of scientific honor, including Nobel Prizes and 
National Medals of Science.
  Thomass success is a testament to his hard work, our communitys 
supportive educational environment, and the potential of our youth to 
lead us into a better future.
  Lets celebrate Thomass achievement as an inspiration and a reminder 
of the critical role education plays in unlocking the immense potential 
of our youth. Congratulations to Thomas for making Ossining and our 
Nation proud.
Title IV of Senate Resolution 4, agreed to by the Senate of February 
4, 1977, calls for establishment of a system for a computerized 
schedule of all meetings and hearings of Senate committees, 
subcommittees, joint committees, and committees of conference. This 
title requires all such committees to notify the Office of the Senate 
Daily Digest--designated by the Rules Committee--of the time, place and 
purpose of the meetings, when scheduled and any cancellations or 
changes in the meetings as they occur.
  As an additional procedure along with the computerization of this 
information, the Office of the Senate Daily Digest will prepare this 
information for printing in the Extensions of Remarks section of the 
Congressional Record on Monday and Wednesday of each week.
  Meetings scheduled for Tuesday, March 12, 2024 may be found in the 
Daily Digest of todays Record.

                                MARCH 13
     10 a.m.
       Committee on Veterans Affairs
         To hold a joint hearing with the House Committee on 
           Veterans Affairs to examine the legislative 
           presentation of The American Legion and multiple 
           veterans service organizations: JWV,

           TAPS, NCHV, MOAA, NACVSO, NCAI, VVA, NGAUS, and FRA.
                                                          390-CHOB

                                MARCH 14
     9:30 a.m.
       Committee on Armed Services
         To hold hearings to examine the posture of United States 
           Northern Command and United States Southern Command in 
           review of the Defense Authorization Request for Fiscal 
           Year 2025 and the Future Years Defense Program; to be 
           immediately followed by a closed session in SVC-217.
                                                            SH-216
     10 a.m.
       Committee on Finance
         To hold hearings to examine the Presidents proposed 
           budget request for fiscal year 2025 for the Department 
           of Health and Human Services.
                                                            SD-215
       Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions
         To hold hearings to examine workers benefitting from new 
           technology and increased productivity.
                                                            SD-430
       Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
         To hold hearings to examine responding to the increasing 
           wildfire threat.
                                                            SD-342
       Committee on the Judiciary
         Business meeting to consider S. 1306, to reauthorize the 
           COPS ON THE BEAT grant program, and the nomination of 
           David O. Barnett, Jr., to be United States Marshal for 
           the District of New Mexico, Department of Justice.
                                                            SD-G50
     10:30 a.m.
       Committee on Foreign Relations
         To hold hearings to examine U.S. strategy in the Pacific 
           Islands region.
                                                            SD-419
I rise today to pay tribute to a great 
American, Major Jerome Kern Chisolm. Major Chisolm was born December 5, 
1950, in Moncks Corner, South Carolina and passed away on January 17, 
2024, in Pensacola, Florida.
  Growing up he graduated from my alma mater Mather Academy in Camden, 
South Carolina where he excelled as a student leader and athlete. Major 
Chisolm also graduated from South Carolina State University and was 
commissioned as a Second Lieutenant in the U.S. Army. When he retired 
from the Army, he became principal of an alternative high school for at 
risk students known as Escambia Charter School in Pensacola, Florida. 
Major Chisolm was a principal, but he wore many hats, such as teacher, 
mentor, and coach. He was a strict disciplinarian but was committed to 
being a positive role model with an emphasis on education. In 2014, his 
school won the National USA Today Weekend Make A Difference Award. The 
award was given for community service volunteering. In addition, the 
Escambia Charter School Board named a building in his honor, The Jerome 
K. Chisolm Building.
  Throughout his life, Jerome Chisolm has been a humanitarian in his 
community. He and his wife Barbara have helped so many people improve 
their quality of life.
, I ask that you and our colleagues join me in celebrating 
Major Chisolms remarkable career and his dedication to helping the 
least among us. Jerome Chisolm will remain a pillar in the Mather 
Academy, South Carolina State University, and military communities 
forever.