today I rise to recognize Jason Anderson for 
his 20 years of impactful service as Economic Development Director for 
the City of Rochelle. In this role, Anderson worked with Illinois 
businesses and others in the Rochelle community to attract increased 
economic investment and improve public infrastructure in Rochelle.
  Anderson graduated from Texas A&amp;M University with a degree in 
Business Administration. Before becoming the Economic Development 
Director, Anderson served in many roles, including Northern Illinois 
Regional Director for former U.S. Senator Peter Fitzgerald.
  Through Andersons tenure, the City of Rochelle saw robust 
improvement in their economy and infrastructure. Since 2005, there has 
been $1.3 billion in capital investments made by businesses and 2,200 
jobs created in Rochelle. Highlights of this economic growth include 
investment projects from companies like Wheatland Tube and the CHS 
Ethanol plant as well as the construction of the Rochelle Business 
Technology Park.
  Additionally, the City of Rochelle has received over $125 million in 
funding for infrastructure over the past two decades. Andersons work 
as Economic Development Director focused specifically on infrastructure 
modernization of the railroad and airport. In Andersons 10 years 
overseeing Rochelles airport it received almost $11 million in funding 
and the Rochelle railroads yearly revenue quadrupled under Andersons 
vision.
  Jason Andersons tireless work has left a lifelong impact on the 
Rochelle community and the state of Illinois. His commitment to our 
community is truly inspiring and I congratulate Jason on 20 years of 
service to Rochelle and wish him the best in all future endeavors.
today, I recognize the Father Tolton 
softball team for their remarkable achievement of clinching the Class 4 
championship. Their 24-10 season record and 5-0 shutout victory over 
Belton in the title game, is the culmination of all the work they put 
in and the great amount of talent on this team.
  It is worth noting that this state championship is the second in 
Father Toltons program history. Their last softball state championship 
came in 2020. This championship serves as an example of the upward 
trajectory of where the program is headed.
  I extend my sincerest congratulations to the Father Tolton softball 
team, coaches, and its supporters. Winning a championship is a 
collective effort that takes an all-hands-on deck approach. The 
community recognizes and highly values their dedication and passion for 
softball.
this past month, it was my honor to attend 
the Eagle Scout Court of Honor for an incredible young man, James 
Scalice. James has learned an incredible amount through the merit badge 
program earning 41 total badges in subjects such as Life Skills, 
Business, and Science. Within his troop, this young man has developed 
leadership skills through elected positions and has learned the value 
of serving his community by participating in countless hours of service 
to his church and community. He has displayed his love for God by 
earning two religious emblems including ``Pope Pius the twelfth from 
the Catholic Diocese of Camden. With a deep love for his country and 
great respect for veterans, James decided to help out the American 
Legion Post 28 in Absecon, South Jersey for his Eagle Scout project.
I rise to commemorate Veterans of Foreign 
Wars (VFW) Willie Barraza Post 9173 for their 75th anniversary. The 
Willie Barraza Post has been an important service organization to 
assist our veteran community, their families, and the wider El Paso 
community.
  The Post was founded in 1949 and named after Willie Barraza, who was 
an Army Sergeant from Smeltertown who went Missing in Action during 
World War II. Smeltertown was located in El Paso, Texas, and housed 
workers of the American Smelting and Refining Company (ASARCO). Willie 
Barraza Post 9173 is the second oldest post in El Paso with veteran 
members from the Korean, Vietnam, and Global War on Terrorism.
  The Willie Barraza Post is chartered with 34 World War II service 
members and currently has 148 members serving our border city and our 
military base of Fort Bliss. Their members are active participants in 
supporting our community. They help raise funds for local churches and 
scholarship opportunities for students. They also serve in recognizing 
veterans through participation in our districts annual Independence 
Day and Veterans Day parades.
  Today, I want to thank the Willie Barraza Post for their service to 
the country and our community. I join them in celebrating their 75th 
Anniversary and commend them for their consistent presence in El Paso. 
I look forward to the continued work that they do in the coming years 
and decades.
today, I am introducing the Court 
Improvement Equity Act which authorizes grants to improve child welfare 
services in Guam, American Samoa, and my district, the Northern Mariana 
Islands.
  As it stands, courts located in the Pacific territories are the only 
entities that do not receive support from the Court Improvement Program 
(CIP) under Title IV-B of the Social Security Act. In all other 
territories and states, the CIP provides a grant to the highest court 
of appeal to assess and improve the handling of foster care and 
adoption proceedings.
  Every child, regardless of where they grow up in our country, has the 
right to a safe, secure, and nurturing family. My bill would enshrine 
this right by extending the same base grant currently available 
everywhere else to our islands.
  The gentleman from Guam, Mr. Moylan, is an original cosponsor of the 
bill. I urge my colleagues to support this vital bipartisan 
legislation.
it is with a heavy heart and 
solemn remembrance that I rise today to pay tribute to an extraordinary 
public servant, trailblazing leader, wife, mother, grandmother, sister, 
mentor and friend of longstanding, Mrs. Brenda Davis Murrell. Sadly, 
Brenda transitioned from labor to reward on November 9, 2024. A 
celebration of her remarkable life will be held at 11:00 a.m. on 
November 15, 2024, at Victory Baptist Church, 640 Meriwether Road, 
Milledgeville, Georgia.
  Brenda Davis Murrell was born August 11, 1951, in Cleveland, Ohio to 
the late Lexie Davis, Sr. and Ms. Bobbie Davis Arnold. Her family 
relocated to Milledgeville, Georgia when Brenda was 10 years old, where 
she began the early stages of her lifes journey of achievement, 
service, and empowerment of others. She was a product of the Baldwin 
County School System where she excelled academically and graduated from 
Boddie High School in 1969.
  Upon graduation, Brenda attended the historic Paine College in 
Augusta, Georgia where she earned a Bachelor of Arts in Sociology in 
1973 and joined the sisterhood of her beloved Delta Sigma Theta 
Sorority, Inc, where she served for more than 50 years holding numerous 
leadership positions and leveraging her influence and vision for the 
sorority to make a lasting impact in communities across Georgia and 
beyond.
  In pursuit of further knowledge and mastery, Brenda completed her 
masters degree in education from the University of Georgia in 1985 and 
armed with a keen understanding of human behavior, she began employment 
as a counselor within the Georgia Department of Corrections, rising 
through the ranks, breaking barriers, and setting unprecedented 
standards. Her tenacity, intellect and leadership skills earned her 
appointment as one of the first 3 Black and female wardens in the State 
of Georgia and her service as Warden at multiple institutions sealed 
her reputation as one of the most highly competent, effective, 
compassionate, and admired prison administrators in the profession. She 
was instrumental in implementing a wide range of transformative 
policies and programs which remain active today, including life 
changing prison ministries. Correctional officers and offenders who 
served under her leadership all say of Brenda that she always treated 
them with dignity and respect.
  Her career culminated as Director of Facilities Operations for the 
Georgia Department of Corrections, overseeing more than 60 facilities 
with 10,000 employees and 47,000 offenders, reaching the zenith of her 
profession and setting a powerful example for future generations of 
leaders.
  Following her retirement, Brenda continued to influence the field as 
a private consultant sharing her expertise with facilities and 
organizations nationwide. However, as she stepped away from 
corrections, she redirected her energy to her ``first love--DST. As a 
Delta, she embraced the Red Hat society, an organization dedicated to 
womens empowerment, embodying the message of living life boldly and 
with purpose.
  Brenda was an avid traveler who cherished exploration, traversing 
continents and embarking on 19 adventures with Carnival and Caribbean 
Cruise lines.
  A woman of unwavering faith, Brendas life was grounded in her 
Christian beliefs and no matter where her career moved her, she sought 
out churches in her community, finding strength and kinship through 
worship. Her spiritual journey began at Flagg Chapel Baptist Church in 
Milledgeville where she served for many years as Church announcer, 
utilizing her distinctive voice and perfect diction there, and within 
her community as a respected public speaker.
  Brenda loved her family. Her sons, Brandon and Bruce Butts were the 
loves of her life, and she was a doting grandmother, to say the least. 
Moreover, she loved her siblings and extended family; frequently 
organizing family reunions, and providing warmth, laughter, and support 
to all of them.

  Brenda was a friend to many who were blessed by the bond of her 
friendship. She was frank and honest in her friendship--sharing not 
just what you might want to hear but what she felt you needed to hear. 
On a personal note, I will forever cherish the wise counsel and sage 
advice Brenda gave me over the last 32 years. It was at her kitchen 
table with Brenda and several friends, poring over maps and pages of 
data, and in fervent prayer, that I resolved to run for Congress in 
1992. As she did for me, Brenda touched so many lives in so many ways 
and because she did, the world is a better place.
, I ask that my colleagues in the House of Representatives 
join my wife, Vivian, and me, along with the people of Georgia and 
beyond in celebrating the extraordinary life of Brenda Davis Murrell 
and in extending our deepest condolences to her family, friends, 
sorors, and all who mourn her loss. Moreover, I pray that we will all 
be consoled and comforted by an abiding faith and the Holy Spirit in 
the days, weeks, and months ahead.
I want to recognize the great school of 
Pineland Learning Center in Vineland, South Jersey, which has been of 
incredible mentorship for children in South Jersey for over four 
decades. Since its founding in 1980 by the late Fred Eccleston, the 
school has been an outstanding outlet for students that have struggled 
in the traditional learning environment by providing alternative 
learning techniques to fit their needs. Many times, the students that 
come to PLC have been dealt hands in life that most adults cant even 
imagine and because of this they have not been able to find their full 
potential in a typical school setting. With the dedicated staff that 
Pineland has to offer, the kids are provided with a safe, structured, 
and consistent learning environment where they can discover their gifts 
and see all the possibilities life has to offer. The staff gains the 
childrens trust by committing themselves to learning who the student 
is by understanding the students personality as well as quirks and 
triggers that cause outbursts. This allows the kids to learn who they 
are by being allowed to be themselves in a culture that feels just like 
a family. PLC goes beyond academics by also providing the students with 
work-based learning for jobs that the local community has to offer, and 
college fairs where many of the kids can attend universities throughout 
the country. It is my great honor to commend the Pineland Learning 
Center on many years of great service to the youth of South Jersey and 
I look forward to many more years of improving their lives. God bless 
Pineland Learning Center and God bless the United States of America.
I had the privilege of attending a 
masterful Eagle Scout Court of Honor for Raylen Weaver from Mullica 
Hill, South Jersey. Raylen has been involved in boy scouts for seven 
years since he was a rising fifth grader as a Webelos Scout and now in 
the tenth grade he has already achieved the rank of Eagle Scout. He has 
held multiple leadership positions which includes the Den Chief, 
Scribe, Patrol Leader and earning his way up to the position of Senior 
Patrol Leader. On his climb up to Senior Patrol Leader, he spent 59 
nights camping, hiked 84 miles, and logged 76 hours of service to 
better his community before he is accredited with completing 130 more 
hours to complete his Eagle Scout project. For his project, he decided 
to create the Little Way Childrens Garden to benefit the Mary Mother 
of Mercy Church in Glassboro, South Jersey. This garden is a beautiful 
prayer area defined by edge stones with concrete and wood benches 
complete with statues of St. Therese, Mary, and St. Joesph in a perfect 
display to benefit children of the church and parishioners. Raylen is 
also an avid runner and biker participating in a Duathlon and the 100-
mile MS ride City to Shore. He plans to attend the Naval Academy or 
West Point to serve his county and continue to improve himself. I have 
all faith that Raylen will make his country proud and continue to make 
his local community proud. God bless Raylen Weaver and God bless the 
United States of America.
it is difficult to imagine a 
Congress without my good friend and longtime colleague Kay Granger--an 
effective and accomplished lawmaker who has diligently represented the 
people of Texas since 1997, when she was elected as the first 
Republican congresswoman from the Lone Star State.
  An incredibly strong, well-informed and tenacious leader, Kay has 
worked tirelessly over the years to make our government more 
transparent and accountable while helping those in need.
  Having worked closely with her over the years, I know her deep 
personal commitment and unwavering resolve to protect unborn children 
and their mothers from the violence of abortion.
  During her remarkable 25 years of service on the powerful House 
Appropriations Committee, she has fought relentlessly to preserve 
critical protections for the weakest and most vulnerable, including the 
Hyde Amendment--which has saved more than 2.5 million lives.
  She has also strongly supported the Smith Amendment, which I first 
authored in 1984, to prevent U.S. taxpayer dollars from funding 
abortions for federal employees and their dependents, and her work on 
foreign aid has helped protect so many unborn babies and women in need 
around the globe.
  As the first Republican Chairwoman on the House Appropriations 
Committee, Kay also led our efforts in the House on many other 
important matters. She worked hard to cut wasteful spending, promote 
fiscal responsibility, and ensure hard-earned American taxpayer dollars 
are spent more efficiently and effectively.
  At every turn, Kay has been steadfast in her support of our 
courageous service members, veterans, and their families and absolutely 
dedicated to boosting our national security, especially while she 
served as Chairwoman of the House Defense Appropriations Subcommittee.
  She has worked tirelessly to hold public officials to account, 
including those at the U.S. State Department in the aftermath of the 
horrific attack on our diplomatic compound in Benghazi that tragically 
left four Americans dead.
  Kays unyielding commitment to improve the lives of her constituents 
and Americans across the country has truly made a difference. We will 
always cherish our time with her in Congress and the incredible lasting 
impact she has had on all of us who have known and worked with her.
I wish to recognize the service 
of Dr. Mark Bouman who is retiring this week from the Field Museum of 
Natural History in Chicago. Dr. Bouman worked for the Field Museum for 
over 15 years, serving most recently as the Senior Environmental Social 
Scientist and, before that, as the Chicago Region Program Director at 
the Museums Keller Science Action Center. His work focused on efforts 
to build better bridges between people and nature across the 
Chicagoland region and the urban world.
  A lifelong Chicagoan who received his undergraduate degree in 
Geography from Valparaiso University and a M.A. and Ph.D. in Geography 
from the University of Minnesota, Dr. Bouman has taught at Valparaiso, 
the University of Minnesota, University of British Columbia, Elmhurst 
College, Chicago State University, and the University of Chicago. He 
has received numerous awards for teaching excellence, funding for 
research and technical assistance projects, and authored or co-authored 
a myriad of peer-reviewed articles and publications.
  Dr. Bouman has played a leading role in raising awareness of the 
incredible culturally- and environmentally-diverse Calumet region. The 
Calumet region is a bi-state area that spans from the Pullman National 
Historical Park to the Indiana Dunes National Park. It is loosely 
bounded by the former U.S. Steel South Works in Chicago, portions of 
suburban Chicago, and the Indiana counties of Lake, Porter, and 
LaPorte. From Lake Michigan to the Indiana Dunes to the Grand Calumet 
River to the Kankakee River. The Calumet is a landscape reworked for 
industrial use that is now undergoing vigorous restoration for 
recreational and educational uses to enrich the lives of its residents 
and visitors.
  While at Chicago State University, which anchors one corner of the 
Calumet region, Dr. Bouman started the Universitys Neighborhood 
Assistance Center, the Calumet Environmental Resource Center, and the 
GIS Laboratory. He also helped establish the Lake Calumet Ecosystem 
Partnership and was Project Director on a map for Chicago Wilderness 
that serves as an important touchstone for current planning work in the 
region.
  Dr. Boumans many involvements in regional affairs have included 
serving as: President of the Calumet Heritage Partnership, where he has 
tirelessly advocated for the creation of a Calumet National Heritage 
Area; Co-Chair of the Calumet Stewardship Initiative, as a Member of 
the Working Group of Vital Lands Illinois; and as a Member of the 
Millennium Reserve Steering Committee.
  In addition to his volunteer pursuits, Dr. Bouman is a huge Cubs fan 
with an encyclopedic knowledge of stats and history about the game 
overall, a community choir singer, and a train buff; one year, he was 
even given the chance to drive a train for his birthday. Hes also one 
of those people who shares a lot of obscure trivia, much to everyones 
delight, not just about The Calumet region but about old Hollywood 
movies, politics, and many other things.
  Please join me in thanking Dr. Bouman for his service and extending 
best wishes on his retirement. I have no doubt he will continue to stay 
actively involved on behalf of our region.
I rise in opposition to H.R. 9495, the 
Stop Terror-Financing and Tax Penalties on American Hostages Act.
  This legislation would grant the Secretary of the Treasury the 
unilateral authority to suspend the tax-exempt status of any 
organization deemed ``terrorist supporting without due process or 
evidence. U.S. law already prohibits nonprofits from providing material 
support to terrorists. Additionally, I am deeply concerned about how 
this legislation could provide President-elect Trumps incoming 
administration with unchecked power to cause irreparable damage to any 
nonprofit he deems a threat to his own political agenda. This could be 
disastrous for nonprofits across the country, including those doing 
important work in the Fourth District like Springboard for the Arts, 
the Playwrights Center, and the Center for Victims of Torture. More 
than 120 civil society groups--including the ACLU, the American 
Federation of Teachers, the NAACP, and the League of Conservation 
Voters--signed a letter opposing this bill due to the potential for 
abuse. I include in the Record this letter. I stand with them, and I 
encourage my colleagues to do the same.
                                               September 20, 2024.
     Hon. Mike Johnson,
     Speaker, House of Representatives,
     Washington, DC.
     Hon. Hakeem Jeffries,
     Democratic Leader, House of Representatives,
     Washington, DC.
       Dear Speaker Johnson and Leader Jeffries: We write to 
     express our deep concerns with H.R. 9495, the Stop Terror-
     Financing and Tax Penalties on American Hostages Act. 
     Specifically, this bill includes the text of H.R. 6408, 
     legislation we strongly oppose as it raises significant 
     constitutional concerns. Because H.R. 6408 vests vast 
     unilateral discretion in the Secretary of Treasury, it 
     creates a high risk of politicized and discriminatory 
     enforcement. The executive branch already has extensive 
     authority to prohibit transactions with individuals and 
     entities it deems connected to terrorism and nonprofit 
     organizations are already prohibited from providing material 
     support to terrorist organizations. In fact, it would be a 
     federal crime for them to do so.
       Moreover, we do not oppose the provisions in H.R. 9495 that 
     relate to preventing the IRS from imposing fines and 
     penalties on hostages while they are held abroad. Indeed, 
     these provisions have already passed the Senate on their own, 
     and if the House of Representatives were to pass a version of 
     this bill that did not include the text of H.R. 6408, it 
     could be sent immediately to the President for his signature.
       Without any evidence as to the need for this legislation, 
     H.R. 6408 authorizes broad and easily abused new powers for 
     the executive branch. It grants the Secretary of the Treasury 
     virtually unfettered discretion to designate a U.S. nonprofit 
     as a ``terrorist supporting organization and to strip it of 
     its tax-exempt status if the Secretary finds that the 
     nonprofit has provided material support to a terrorist group, 
     even if the ``support is not intentional or connected to 
     actual violence.
       While the sponsors of this legislation have stated that it 
     is needed to avoid what they refer to as ``time-consuming 
     bureaucratic process under current law, what the bill 
     sponsors are actually seeking to avoid is fundamental due 
     process. If this bill were to become law, the Secretary of 
     Treasury could strip a US nonprofit of its tax-exempt status 
     without providing the nonprofit a meaningful opportunity to 
     defend itself before a neutral decisionmaker. The legislation 
     further does not require disclosure of all the reasons for 
     such a decision or the evidence relied upon to support it. 
     Nor would the government be required to provide any evidence 
     in its possession that might undermine its decision, leaving 
     an accused nonprofit entirely in the dark about what conduct 
     the government believes qualifies as material support.
       The potential for abuse under H.R. 6408 is immense as the 
     executive branch would be handed a tool it could use to curb 
     free speech, censor nonprofit media outlets, target political 
     opponents, and punish disfavored groups across the political 
     spectrum. Moreover, the addition of this authority to the tax 
     code would allow the IRS to explicitly target and harass 
     domestic nonprofits using its investigative authority. It is 
     also not hard to imagine a future administration using this 
     power in far broader circumstances that have nothing to do 
     with the

     hostilities in Gaza. And as more recent congressional 
     oversight efforts make clear, these efforts are part of 
     concerted attack on civil society that is targeted at more 
     than just groups involved in the campus protests regarding 
     Gaza. The executive branch could use this authority to target 
     its political opponents and use the fear of crippling legal 
     fees, the stigma of the designation, and donors fleeing 
     controversy to stifle dissent and chill speech and advocacy. 
     And while the broadest applications of this authority may not 
     ultimately hold up in court, the potential reputational and 
     financial cost of fending off an investigation and litigating 
     a wrongful designation could functionally mean the end of a 
     targeted nonprofit before it ever has its day in court.
       The lack of guardrails creates the potential for future 
     administrations to weaponize these powers against groups on 
     both ends of the ideological spectrum. Even if they may never 
     be designated as ``terrorist-supporting, let alone charged 
     with a crime, nonprofits will curtail their activities as a 
     precaution in order to avoid stigmatizing and financially 
     devastating punishments. That is why we strongly urge you to 
     oppose the inclusion of H.R. 6408 in H.R. 9495.
           Sincerely,
       #WelcomeWithDignity, 18 Million Rising, Advocacy for 
     Principled Action in Government, Alliance for Peacebuilding, 
     American Atheists, American Civil Liberties Union, American 
     Federation of Teachers, American Friends Service Committee, 
     American Oversight, Americans United for Separation of Church 
     and State, Amnesty International USA, Anethum Global, Arab 
     American Institute (AAI), Asian Americans Advancing Justice | 
     AAJC, Asian Law Caucus, Aunties Coalition, Ayuda, Bend the 
     Arc: Jewish Action, Borderlands Resource Initiative, Brennan 
     Center for Justice at NYU School of Law.
       Center for American Progress, Center for Civilians in 
     Conflict (CIVIC), Center for Common Ground, Center for 
     Constitutional Rights, Center for Democracy &amp; Technology, 
     Center for International Policy, Center for Media and 
     Democracy, Center for Popular Democracy, Center for Victims 
     of Torture, Charity and Security Network, Chinese for 
     Affirmative Action, Citizens for Responsibility and Ethics in 
     Washington (CREW), Civil Liberties Defense Center, Coalition 
     for Civil Freedoms, Coalition for Humane Immigrant Rights 
     (CHIRLA), COLAGE, Colorado Immigrant Rights, Coalition Color 
     of Change, Community Change Action, Council on American-
     Islamic Relations.
       DAWN, DC Volunteer Lawyers Project, Defending Rights &amp; 
     Dissent, Demand Progress, Democratic Messaging Project, 
     EarthRights International, Earthworks, Emgage Action, 
     Empowering Pacific Islander Communities, Ensaaf, Equality 
     Federation, Evangelical Lutheran Church in America, Faith in 
     Action, Food Shift, Free Press Action, Freedom of the Press 
     Foundation, Friends Committee on National Legislation, 
     Friends of Human Rights, Greenpeace USA, HEART.
       Hindus for Human Rights, Human Rights First, Human Rights 
     Watch, ICNA Dallas, Immigration Hub, Indivisible, 
     International Civil Society Action Network (ICAN), 
     International Jewish Anti-Zionist Network, International 
     Refugee Assistance Project (IRAP), Islamic Association of The 
     Colony, Islamic Center of Quad Cities, Just Foreign Policy, 
     League of Conservation Voters, McKinney Islamic Association, 
     Medical Center Islamic Society, Middle East Democracy Center 
     (MEDC), MLFA, MoveOn, MPower Change Action Fund, 
     Multicultural Center.
       Muslim Advocates, Muslim Counterpublics Lab, Muslim Justice 
     League, Muslims for Just Futures, NAACP, National Council of 
     Asian Pacific Americans, National Disabled Legal 
     Professionals Association, National Education Association, 
     National Immigration Law Center, National Iranian American 
     Council Action, National Lawyers Guild-Mesoamerica 
     subcommittee, National LGBTQ Task Force Action Fund, National 
     Network of Abortion Funds, National Womens Law Center, 
     NETWORK Lobby for Catholic Social Justice, New Georgia 
     Project Action Fund, New Israel Fund, North American Indian 
     Muslim Association, NTIC, Oil Change International.
       Organization for Identity &amp; Cultural Development 
     (OICD.net), Othman Bin Affan Mosque, OPAWL--Building AAPI 
     Feminist Leadership, Oxfam America, Palestine Legal, PASNY, 
     Peace Action, Peace Appeal Foundation, Peace Catalyst 
     International, Peace Direct, People for the American Way, 
     Peoples Action, Planned Parenthood Federation of America, 
     Plus, Positive Womens Network-USA, Presbyterian Church 
     (USA), Office of Public Witness, Project On Government 
     Oversight, Project South, Protect Democracy, Public Citizen.
       Refreshed Refined Reformed R3 Inc, Reproductive Freedom for 
     All (former NARAL Pro-Choice America), Restore the Fourth, 
     September 11th Families for Peaceful Tomorrows, Shoulder to 
     Shoulder Campaign, Southern Poverty Law Center, Stop AAPI 
     Hate, The Interfaith Center of New York, The Seed Program by 
     Kai, Inc., The Sikh Coalition, The United Methodist Church--
     General Board of Church and Society, The Workers Circle, The 
     X-Lab, Tides Center, Tides Foundation, Unitarian Universalist 
     Service Committee (UUSC), US Campaign for Palestinian Rights 
     Action (USCPR Action), Win Without War, Women for Weapons 
     Trade Transparency, Womens March.
it is my great pleasure to wish Tony 
Bocelle a happy 100th birthday after so many great years of serving our 
country, being a great family man, and

giving back to his community. Tony gave years of his life to his 
country by serving in the United States Army during World War II being 
in the 11th Airborne Division where he was involved in several combat 
missions. In his time of service, he bravely assisted in a daring 
prison raid in Los Banos, Philippines, which resulted in freeing nearly 
3,000 American prisoners from the horrific treatment from the enemys 
military. The operation took place on February 23, 1945, when prisoners 
were lined up to be executed before the 11th Airborne division made 
their attack and liberated the thousands of allied prisoners of war and 
civilians. Tony was shown homage for his service to his country on his 
100th birthday on April 19th of this year when 100 flags were placed in 
his yard from Americans and Filipinos thanking him for his service. 
Since the end of War World II, Tony has continued to be an outstanding 
member of society and has fathered a beautiful family that have added 
to their fathers legacy. I wish Tony a happy birthday and I wish him 
100 more extraordinary years. God bless Tony Bocelle and God bless the 
United States of America.
I join my colleagues from Ohio and across 
the country in paying tribute to our friend, former Congressman David 
L. Hobson, who died on October 6.
  Dave was one of the Buckeye States most respected public servants. 
He worked on behalf of the people of the Seventh Congressional District 
for 18 years--and served in the State Senate for eight years prior to 
that. He took great pride in solving problems great and small on behalf 
of his constituents.
  A longtime member of the Appropriations Committee and a Military 
Construction cardinal, Dave was a champion of our states military 
installations of all types, ensuring that they were in the best 
position possible to contribute to our national defense.
  Dave was himself a proud Ohio Air National Guard veteran, serving 
during the Berlin Wall crisis. In recognition of his service in and out 
of uniform, in 2022 he was inducted into the Ohio Veterans Hall of 
Fame--a high honor accorded to no more than 20 Ohioans each year.
, we are grateful that men like Dave Hobson are willing to 
enter the arena and commit their lives to public service. Our prayers 
are with his wife, Carolyn, their three children, and their grand- and 
great-grandchildren at this time of sorrow.