I am proud to honor and celebrate 
Dell Technologies 40 years of remarkable service. Founded on May 3, 
1984, by Michael Dell in a dorm room at the University of Texas, the 
company has made a monumental and lasting impression toward making 
Central Texas a great place to call home. The impacts Dell Technologies 
has made not only on the region by also the state are impeccable and I 
am honored Dell Technologies calls Round Rock home.
  Throughout their years of service, Dell Technologies has become a 
global leader in innovation and a critical economic engine for Central 
Texas. During their many years they have remained devoted to their 
mission of making technologies that drive human progress. While having 
their headquarters in Central Texas, Dell Technologies has been able to 
provide high paying jobs, make economic opportunities, and support our 
districts growth. Dell Technologies has made enormous contributions to 
the technology revolution that has defined our changing times, bringing 
growth and prosperity to Central Texas.
  Dell Technologies has touched countless lives for the better and 
continues to make a positive impact on those it is dedicated to serve. 
I am proud to help celebrate 40 years of this incredible organization, 
and to join Central Texas in wishing this amazing company nothing but 
the best in the decades to come.
I rise today to honor the life of my long-
time friend, Ira Lloyd ``Tookie Kirkham of Tarkington Prairie, Texas, 
who passed away on April 29, 2024. Tookie dutifully served the 
residents of Liberty County for twelve years as county judge before 
retiring in 2006. He was a patriarch in the surrounding community, a 
wonderful mentor to many, a fantastic athlete, and a devoted public 
servant.
  Tookie was born on August 26, 1942, in Cleveland, Texas, to Ira Joe 
Kirkham and Bobbie Chapman Kirkham. The family later moved to 
Tarkington Prairie, where Tookie attended Tarkington High School, 
excelling in

many different sports. His athletic accomplishments in high school 
earned him nine college scholarships, a state championship in the high 
jump, and All-State honors in football and basketball. After graduation 
in 1961, Tookie attended the University of Corpus Christi on a 
basketball scholarship. Nevertheless, he remained a staunch supporter 
of Tarkington ISD and Tarkington athletics for the rest of his life.
  Following college, Tookie accepted a job as a lineman with 
Southwestern Bell but soon moved on to work at Jefferson Chemical 
before spending many years at Texaco. During that time, he also started 
a second career in public service, beginning with an appointment on the 
Dairy Day Board in 1968. Tookie went on to hold many other public 
service positions, including serving on the Tarkington School Board, 
the Cleveland Bank and Trust Board of Directors, the Soil and Water 
Conservation District, the Trinity River Board, and the Yettie-Kersting 
Hospital Board. He was also an involved member and leader at Oak Shade 
Baptist Church, the Greater Cleveland Chamber of Commerce, the 
Cleveland Rotary Club, and the Tarkington Prairie Masonic Lodge No. 
498.
  However, the crescendo of his public service career occurred when 
Tookie was elected as Liberty County Judge in 1994, the first person to 
ever do so from Tarkington Prairie. Throughout his tenure in this 
position, Tookie remained committed to bringing jobs and industry to 
Liberty County. He championed many transportation projects in the area, 
promoted fiscally conservative policies, and worked to help juveniles 
turn their lives around. In retirement, Tookies role in local politics 
was advisor and counselor to many elected officials, often filling in 
as a substitute judge for surrounding Southeast Texas county judges. 
One of Tookies legacy projects was the State Highway 105 relief route 
bypass in Cleveland. For his work securing contracts, right-of-way, and 
funding, the Texas Department of Transportation honored him with its 
prestigious Road Hand Award in 2012.
  Tookie married his high school sweetheart, Cordella Price Kirkham, in 
1964 and had two daughters, Kem and Kehle. His four grandchildren and 
two great-grandchildren were the pride and joy of his life.
, I will always appreciate Judge Ira Lloyd ``Tookie 
Kirkhams support and friendship over the years. I send my deepest 
sympathy and prayers to his wife, Cordella, and loved ones. He will 
certainly be missed by all.
Mr Speaker, I rise today to honor George ``Lum Atkinson, 
a veteran and dedicated community leader from Gulfport, Florida.
  George was born on June 23, 1926, in Birmingham, Alabama, right 
before the Great Depression. As Tom Brokaw once said, ``the greatest 
generation that ever lived. The oldest of 4 boys, he had only one 
pair of shoes. They were for school, Church, and any other fancy 
occasion. This meant basketball in the school gym was played barefoot 
or in socks. When he was nine years old, he was hit in the head with a 
baseball bat and had to stay in bed for six months. He would spend his 
days in bed shooting bbs into a metal tin with wax. Every evening, his 
father would melt the wax, pick out the bbs, and hang it back up in the 
morning.
  In the mid-1940s, Lum and his family had to leave the cold of Alabama 
for the warmth of Arizona or Florida due to his brothers asthma. They 
had been to Florida before to visit family, so they landed in Treasure 
Island and began their lives on the Gulf Coast. He and his family 
became a part of the community and became the first six members of 
Church by the Sea in Madeira Beach, Florida. Lum was a student in high 
school when World War II began. As a senior at St. Petersburg High 
School, Lum decided to drop out of school and enlist in the Marines to 
defend our country. Since he was only 17, his parents had to give their 
permission. His mother was against his early enlistment, wanting him to 
get his diploma before enlisting. She made him promise that he would 
get his diploma when he returned after the war was over. So, after the 
war, he returned to St. Petersburg High School to get his degree. When 
you make a promise to Momma, you keep it.
  Lum was an excellent marksman during World War II. He went to Hawaii 
in the 2nd Division, then transferred to the 6th Division to 
participate in the Battle of Okinawa. On April 1, 1945, the invasion of 
Okinawa began. Lum was a member of the main landing force in northern 
Okinawa. By April 20th, the northern portion of the island was under 
the control of the 6th Division. With the northern portion secured, 
Lums unit took on new duties critical to

the war effort. Lum assisted in maintaining the airstrip during the 
day, guarding the airstrip from snipers and sabotage while in a foxhole 
at night, and getting supplies to the southern portion of the island 
where the Japanese had a stronghold.
  When the war ended, Lums unit was sent to China to guard Japanese 
prisoners and help the Chinese repair their country. For their service 
in the Battle of Okinawa, the 6th Marine Division was awarded the 
Presidential Unit Citation, the highest division award possible.
  Corporal George ``Lum Atkinson was awarded the World War II Combat 
Action Ribbon, the Asiatic Pacific Theater Ribbon, and the Good Conduct 
Medal.
  When he returned from World War II, he met and married the love of 
his life, Mary. They settled down in the small town of Gulfport, 
Florida, where they raised three girls. During this time, he joined the 
Marine Corps Reserve. He was called up for the Korean War and was 
stationed at Camp Lejeune. Always willing to serve his country and 
community, Lum worked for 38 years at Florida Power as a lineman, 
foreman, and switchman. While at Florida Power, he played on the 
company softball team. Knowing his love for the game, one of his 
coworkers asked him to help with Gulfport Little League around 1957. He 
started coaching and remained active on and off for almost 50 years, 
serving as President, Secretary, Umpire, Scorekeeper, Manager, Coach, 
and Groundskeeper. He is still in touch with many of his players. In 
fact, at his 95th birthday party, about 30 of his former ballplayers 
came to celebrate him.
  In 2002, the City of Gulfport renovated the baseball fields at 
Tomlinson Park, and because of his dedication and loyalty, they named 
the new park ``Lum Atkinson Ball Fields. Caring about the City of 
Gulfport, Lum was also a member of the Gulfport Volunteer Fire 
Department. He retired with the rank of lieutenant when the city 
changed to a Fire Department with full-time firefighters. When his wife 
Mary and her sister, Catherine Hickman, founded the Gulfport Community 
Players and the Gulfport Historical Society, Lum became a member of 
both organizations. Just as he was a dedicated member of the Gulfport 
Little League, Lum was an active supporter and volunteer of those two 
organizations Gulfport Community Players, Gulfport Historical Society, 
and the Gulfport Little League continue to flourish today, contributing 
to the vibrant community of Gulfport, thanks in no small measure to the 
dedication of Lum Atkinson.
  Please join me in appreciation for Lum Atkinson and all the men like 
him, who selflessly defended our freedoms abroad and then came home to 
build strong families and strong communities. I thank Lum. May God 
Bless him and the United States of America.
yesterday I was delayed in 
traveling to Washington, D.C. from South Carolina, and missed votes.
  Had I been present, I would have voted: YEA on Roll Call No. 177 
(H.R. 7219), and YEA on Roll Call No. 178 (H.R. 7525).
I rise today to recognize the Airport 
Dedication Ceremony in honor of Mr. Duane Spalsbury.
He served in the air force as a fighter pilot in the European Theater. 
He flew a variety of planes including P47, P51, P38, P39 and P63.
  When he returned home from the war, he moved to the Gila Valley with 
his wife Laura Lee Golden where he worked as an accountant. Mr. 
Spalsbury also helped to found and serve as the first chairman of the 
Mt. Graham Community Hospital.
  He then turned his attention to remote controlled airplanes. He built 
them and flew them. Mr Duane Spalsbury passed away in Safford, AZ on 
Friday, November 16, 2012.
  We extend our gratitude for his dedicated service and are eternally 
thankful for his contributions to our country.
I rise today to recognize Destiny Orozco 
Uribe for earning the Arvada Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth 
Award.
  Destiny has overcome many challenges along her journey to success, 
demonstrating perseverance at every step. Students who strive to make 
the most of their education, like Destiny, develop crucial skills and a 
work ethic that will guide them for the rest of their lives. This award 
is a testament to Destinys hard work, determination, and perseverance 
at Jefferson Jr./Sr. High School and is clearly just the beginning of a 
bright and promising future.
  It is my honor to congratulate Destiny Orozco Uribe on achieving the 
Arvada Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth Award.
I rise today to recognize Joelys Rivera 
for earning the Arvada Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth Award.
  Joelys has overcome many challenges along her journey to success, 
demonstrating perseverance at every step. Students who strive to make 
the most of their education, like Joelys, develop crucial skills and a 
work ethic that will guide them for the rest of their lives. This award 
is a testament to Joelyss hard work, determination, and perseverance 
at Jefferson Jr./Sr. High School and is clearly just the beginning of a 
bright and promising future.
  It is my honor to congratulate Joelys Rivera on achieving the Arvada 
Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth Award.
I rise today to recognize Seraphine 
Pasaribu for earning the Arvada Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for 
Youth Award.
  Seraphine has overcome many challenges along her journey to success, 
demonstrating perseverance at every step. Students who strive to make 
the most of their education, like Seraphine, develop crucial skills and 
a work ethic that will guide them for the rest of their lives. This 
award is a testament to Seraphines hard work, determination, and 
perseverance at Jefferson Jr./Sr. High School and is clearly just the 
beginning of a bright and promising future.
  It is my honor to congratulate Seraphine Pasaribu on achieving the 
Arvada Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth Award.
I rise today to honor a dedicated public 
servant, Sherburne County Auditor-Treasurer Diane Arnold. After 34 
years of service to the county, the last 17 of which as Auditor-
Teasurer, Diane is retiring this July.
  Throughout her tenure as Auditor-Treasurer, Diane has overseen 
financial operations in Sherburne County, ensuring the responsible and 
efficient management of taxpayer funds. Dianes dedication to 
transparency and accountability has earned her the respect and trust of 
her coworkers and constituents.
  In her role as County Auditor/Treasurer, Diane managed the countys 
investments and checking account, administered elections, issued 
drivers licenses and collected and computed taxes for individuals 
throughout Sherburne County.
  Her achievements extend beyond her official role as Sherburne County 
Auditor-Treasurer. Diane is a World Champion and Reserve World Champion 
with her horses and is an active member of the Sherburne County 
community.
  We would like to thank Diane for the profound impact she has had on 
Sherburne County and hope she enjoys her well-deserved retirement.
I rise in recognition of Kelly Lungren 
McCollum, my Chief of Staff since my election to Congress in 2010. 
Kelly is retiring from Capitol Hill today, having served several 
Members of Congress for more than twenty-five years.
  The daughter of former U.S. Congressman Dan Lungren, Kelly was born 
in Long Beach, California. Upon her fathers first election to 
Congress, her family moved to the Washington, DC area in 1979. Raised 
in Vienna, Virginia, Kelly attended Our Lady of Good Counsel Catholic 
School.
  Kelly graduated from high school in three years and started at Santa 
Clara University. Shortly thereafter, Kelly began a career in August of 
1994 as a Congressional staffer for then-U.S. Representative James 
Inhofe, who at that time was running for Oklahomas open U.S. Senate 
seat. During Kellys time in Congress, she held every position in my 
district and D.C. offices, other than Legislative Director.
  After her service to the Sooner State, Kelly returned to Capitol Hill 
and entered a new chapter of her professional life, serving as Chief of 
Staff to U.S. Congressman Jeff Fortenberry. Around the same time, she 
would meet her loving husband, Jason, whom she has been married to for 
nearly eighteen years.
  Kelly would continue in Congress, dedicating a period of time to the 
legislative team of U.S. Representative Louie Gohmert before the 
beginning of a thirteen-and-a-half-year career as my Chief of Staff.
  As my Chief of Staff, Kelly will be best remembered as a true 
professional, a dedicated servant to the people of Virginias Ninth 
District, and a source of responsible leadership for my staff, 
colleagues, and family. More importantly, she has been a great friend.
  Congratulations to Kelly on her remarkable career. Her institutional 
knowledge, loyalty and leadership are qualities that will be missed by 
my office and many others. I wish her nothing more than the absolute 
best.
RECOGNIZING TIMOTHY WADHAMS DEDICATION TO HIS NATION AND HIS COMMUNITY
I rise today to recognize Timothy Wadhams, 
the former Chair of the Wolfpack environmental association and a 
community leader in Ann Arbor. His consistent philanthropy and his 
tireless efforts in supporting our communitys conservation efforts are 
worthy of commendation.
  Tim is a native Ann Arborite who attended Pioneer High School, where 
he is in their Athletic Hall of Fame for his accomplishments as a 
member of both the football and basketball teams. To this day, Tim is 
an active booster of the Pioneer Football Program and started the 
Pioneer Academic Athletic Fund. His own athletic talents on the field 
earned him a position on the University of Michigan Football Team, a 
premier educational institution which he would graduate from with a 
bachelors degree in economics and a Master of Business Administration 
degree.
  Tim is not only a former Chief Executive Officer, board member for 
major business organizations, and longtime supporter of our communitys 
educational institutions, but has also contributed significantly to our 
states natural resources conservation. As Chair of the conservation 
group, ``The Wolfpack, Tim was instrumental in leading various 
conservation and environmental groups to accomplish the organizations 
goals. The Wolfpack is composed of some of our states leading 
organizations in environmental work, but Wolfpacks impact has also 
extended past local efforts to advocate that Congress take action to 
protect our land and waterways from contaminants, to support wildlife, 
and to preserve our Great Lakes. As Chair, Tim was responsible for 
leading this coalition that continues to do invaluable work for our 
natural at areas.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in honoring Timothy 
Wadhams for his dedication to conservation, philanthropy, and community 
development in the Ann Arbor regional area. I thank Tim.
I rise today to recognize Vanassa Alex 
Radcliffe for earning the Arvada Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for 
Youth Award.
  Vanassa has overcome many challenges along her journey to success, 
demonstrating perseverance at every step. Students who strive to make 
the most of their education, like Vanassa, develop crucial skills and a 
work ethic that will guide them for the rest of their lives. This award 
is a testament to Vanassas hard work, determination, and perseverance 
at Jefferson Jr./Sr. High School and is clearly just the beginning of a 
bright and promising future.
  It is my honor to congratulate Vanassa Alex Radcliffe on achieving 
the Arvada Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth Award.