I rise today to thank Senior Pastor Chul 
Lee for his service with the Dallas Central Methodist Church and to 
congratulate him on his retirement.
  Pastor Lees exceptional leadership at the Dallas Central Methodist 
Church has brought about remarkable initiatives that have made a 
significant impact on our community. One of the standout achievements 
during his tenure has been the churchs dedication to providing 
scholarships to various segments of our community. Over the past 15 
years, these scholarships have totaled an impressive $500.000, making 
it possible for numerous young individuals to pursue their educational 
aspirations. These segments include students attending university from 
the Irving Police Department, students from the firefighting community, 
and students from Irving Senior High School who are seeking higher 
education.
  Pastor Sung Chul Lees unwavering commitment to our communitys 
welfare serves as a testament to his profound dedication to the well-
being of our citizens and his faith. Through his leadership and the 
contributions of the Dallas Central Methodist Church, they have greatly 
improved the lives of numerous Irving residents. It is my honor to 
congratulate Senior Pastor Sung Chul Lee on his successful career and 
retirement.
it is with great pride that I rise today to 
join the congregation of the Beulah Heights First Pentecostal Church of 
New Haven, Connecticut in extending my heartfelt congratulations on the 
celebration of their 100th Anniversary. Throughout its history, the 
Church and its congregation have demonstrated a unique commitment to 
serve the community and ensure that the most vulnerable of our citizens 
could find comfort and resources in their time of need.
  Originally named Beulah Heights Mission, the ministry was founded in 
a converted storefront on Poplar Street in New Haven during the summer 
of 1923 under the leadership of the late Elder Walter and Rosa B. 
Andrews. While their initial membership was modest, just twelve, over 
the next several decades, under the leadership of Elder Andrews, Mother 
Andrews, and then Elder Lambert Tolbert, the ministry saw steady 
growth. In 1943, the Elder George H. Brooks succeeded Elder Tolbert and 
in 1950 was installed as Pastor of Beulah Heights Church.
  The installation of Pastor George Brooks at Beulah Heights Church 
also marked the beginning of what would be an expansion of the Churchs 
work in the community and generational leadership at Beulah Heights. 
After serving as junior pastor under his father, Elder Theodore L. 
Brooks, Sr. was installed as the churchs fifth pastor in 1988.
  It was the vision and leadership of Bishop Brooks that Beulah Heights 
became a pillar in the Greater New Haven community. The first outreach 
ministry under this new administration was the Beulah Land Development 
Corporation, launching what still today is an ongoing renaissance in 
New Havens Dixwell community. The organizations mission focused on 
transforming severely blighted properties into safe, revitalized 
affordable homes for working families. Over the last four years, its 
Back to School Fair has served over 1,500 children and 3,000 families. 
Children from preschool through high school receiving backpacks filled 
with all the tools necessary to be prepared on the first day of school 
and adults and parents in attendance are connected with a network of 
health and human services resources from around the city. The Beulah 
Heights Social Integration Program provides outreach to individuals who 
have experienced substance abuse, dependence and incarceration--
equipping them with essential resources to help them obtain employment, 
housing, and mental health support. And the T.L. Brooks Ministries 
utilizes new technologies to make the preached word available for the 
masses on CD and DVD.
  Today, while Bishop Brooks remains an active participant in both the 
Church and its many ministries, his son, Elder Harold Brooks leads 
Beulah Heights First Pentecostal Church, while his other son, Darrell 
Brooks serves as the Chief Operating Officer for Beulah Land 
Development--representing a third generation of invaluable service to 
our community.
  The Beulah Heights First Pentecostal Church has not only been a 
center for religious worship, but a vehicle through which their members 
could give back to the community. For the last century, the Beulah 
Heights First Pentecostal Church has been a fixture in our community, 
their ministry and outreach efforts leaving an indelible mark on our 
community. The Beulah Heights First Pentecostal Church gives its 
members a place to find their spiritual center and to solidify and 
support their values--a beacon of light and hope for their members and 
the community. I am proud to stand today and extend my very best wishes 
to them as they mark this milestone in their history. Happy 100th 
Anniversary and as we say in Italian, Cent Anni.
I rise today to recognize our Texas-24 
Hometown Hero, FMC Fort Worth Warden, Freddy Garrido. Warden Garrido 
has spent almost 30 years in the Bureau of Prisons and is retiring on 
October 31, 2023. During his impressive career, Warden Freddy Garrido 
has served selflessly to promote responsibility and lifelong skills for 
those incarcerated. Through his passion for service, Warden Garrido has 
used his role to give an underserved community hope and a second 
chance. Warden Garrido served at various duty stations including, FDC 
Oakdale, FCI Forrest City, FCC Butner, FMC Lexington, FCC Florence, FCC 
Victorville, and FCC Beaumont before moving to North Texas at a 
critical time to provide leadership and direction at FMC Fort Worth. 
Those who work closely with him say that his attitude and leadership 
style make them more empathetic and compassionate in fulfilling their 
own duties. During his time at FMC Fort Worth, Warden Garrido has made 
leadership development and training a priority. By establishing 
vocational programs, like a ``second chance cafe and HVAC program, 
the incarcerated have the opportunity to learn valuable life skills to 
equip them upon their release into society. I want to congratulate 
Warden Garrido on his retirement and thank him for his outstanding 
career of service.
it is with a heavy heart that I rise today 
to join the New Haven community in mourning the loss of the Reverend 
Juan Martinez. At the age of 94, Reverend Martinez lived a full life, 
full of family, faith, and service to our community. His legacy of 
advocacy and religious leadership has left an indelible mark and will 
serve as an inspiration to many for generations to come.
  Born in Puerto Rico, Reverend Martinez came to New Haven more than 
six decades ago, eventually making a home in West Haven where he has 
lived for more than fifty years. He and his first wife, Persida, raised 
six children, all of whom have mirrored their fathers commitment to 
community. His son, John, was a beloved State Representative for many 
years before his tragic passing in 2002; Joe a firefighter for the City 
of New Haven; and Ariel, followed his father in becoming a pastor 
himself. His daughter, Evelyn, volunteered her time as a supervisor and 
site coordinator for the Vita Tax Program.
  A Pentecostal Minister, Reverend Martinez founded the Door of 
Salvation Pentecostal Church of New Haven where he led the congregation 
for more than sixty years. As a spiritual guide, he nourished the souls 
of many--often providing much needed comfort during the hardest of 
personal trials. A leader in the Pentecostal ministry and understanding 
the growing need for Spanish language led houses of worship, Reverend 
Martinez was also responsible for the establishment of a multitude of 
Spanish speaking churches across the state.
  As a pastor, Reverend Martinez had a unique insight into the needs of 
his community. With many in his congregation struggling to find 
financial and economic security, he looked for ways he could make a 
difference in their lives. This led him to serve on several local 
service organization boards including the City of New Haven Crossroads 
Program, the Hill Health Center, and the Latino Youth Development 
Program. Always seeking to do more for his community, Reverend Martinez 
founded the New Life Corporation, an organization formed to aid 
communities and residents with financial and tax assistance; co-founded 
the Evangelical Spanish Association of New Haven, which assisted the 
inner city with low-income housing; and was instrumental in the 
development of Junta for Progressive Action, the oldest Latino, 
community-based nonprofit organization in New Haven which began as an 
advocacy hub to address the needs of Greater New Haven first generation 
of migrants and has grown to offer no-cost social services, legal 
services, immigration services, adult education, and youth programs to 
over 2,000 low-income individuals annually.
  As a respected leader in his community, local elected officials often 
sought his advice and counsel. When I first decided to run for 
Congress, Reverend Martinez was one of my earliest supporters. He 
introduced me not only to his congregation but also several others 
across the City. He and his family embraced me, and I have cherished 
the special friendship we have built over the years. I, like so many 
others, have and will continue to be inspired by Reverend Martinez--his 
compassion, advocacy, and commitment to bettering our community and 
improving the quality of life for all.
  Today we mourn the loss of a giant--a spiritual guide, a community 
leader, a friend, and mentor. Reverend Juan Martinez will be deeply 
missed by all of those fortunate enough to have known him. I extend my 
deepest sympathies to his wife and partner, Maria, as well as his 
children; Ariel, Joe, and Persida; and his four beloved grandchildren, 
Elias, Alexandra, Jonothan, and Priscilla. His legacy will live on 
through them and the countless lives he touched.
Speaker, I rise today to celebrate the 
life of James ``Jim Theodore Herfurth, who passed away peacefully in 
his home November 1, 2023, in Osage Beach, Missouri
  Jim was born on July 21, 1937, to parents Theodore and Mathilda 
Herfurth in Eldon, Missouri. He attended Eldon High School where he 
played forward for the Mustangs Basketball team. The team ultimately 
won the State Championship in 1954, and Jim graduated in 1955. He 
continued his education at the University of Missouri, graduating in 
1959 with a BS degree in banking and finance, and commissioning as a 
second lieutenant in the United States Army Artillery. He was stationed 
at Fort Sill, Oklahoma, where he served as a Finance Officer and as 
adjutant for the Target Artillery Department. His passion for his 
country led him to extend his original tour for an additional year due 
to the Berlin Crises.
  After leaving active duty, Jim began his finance career with IBM in 
Kansas City, Missouri. In 1964, he began his 35-year banking career 
with Central Trust Bank in Jefferson City, Missouri while 
simultaneously joining the 420th Civil Affairs National Guard Reserve 
Unit. During his career with the Central Bank organization, Jim rose 
through the operations and loans divisions, as well as the ranks of the 
Missouri National Guard, until Central Bancompanys acquisition of Bank 
of Lake of the Ozarks in 1987. Jim was then named President and CEO of 
the newly named Central Bank of Lake of the Ozarks, and he earned his 
rank of Colonel in the Missouri National Guard.
  Passionate about his community, Jim left a mark wherever he lived. 
His commitment to his community was evidenced through his involvement 
in the new construction of roads and bridges, economic development 
through Central Bank, public schools, YMCA, hospitals, and the Dogwood 
Animal Shelter. He had a strong sense of community and worked hard to 
make his home a better place for everyone.
  Although a busy man, Jim still found time to enjoy his hobbies. He 
loved to play golf, spending an equal amount of time playing as he did 
trying to convince his grandchildren to play. When he wasnt golfing, 
Jim was snow skiing, visiting Palm Springs, or visiting he and his 
wifes friends in Tucson, Arizona.
  Left to cherish his memory is his wife Marjorie M. Herfurth, his two 
children from his marriage in 1961 to Barbara A. Silvers: daughter, 
Kimberly Herfurth Ayscue of Franklinton, North Carolina; son, J. 
Matthew Herfurth and his wife Jeane Herfurth of Madison, Mississippi; 
his four grandchildren Michael and Andrew Boyleir; daughter, Grace, of 
Monet, Missouri. He was preceded in death by his sister, Barbara 
Herfurth Moffitt.
  Jims life was one of service, grace, and love for his family and 
community. He will be deeply missed by all whom he encountered.
had I been present, I would have voted YEA 
on Roll Call No. 578, H. Res. 798, and YEA on Roll Call No. 577, H.R. 
6126.
I rise to recognize and honor Bosq, an 
exceptional restaurant in Aspen, Colorado, for being awarded the 
coveted Michelin star. This honor puts Bosq among the finest 
restaurants not only in Colorado, but in the entire world. Bosq joins 
the ranks of just over 200 restaurants in America to have this great 
honor.
  The Michelin star represents years of hard work, dedication, and an 
unwavering commitment to culinary excellence. Michelin stars are a 
hallmark of fine dining and coveted honor by many of the worlds top 
chefs and restaurant patrons. Not easy to obtain, the stars are awarded 
to restaurants that are the absolute best in a given city. Restaurants 
gain immense prestige and exposure as a result of this honor.
  An Aspen native, Barclay Dodge and his wife Molly have created a 
dining experience that is nothing short of exceptional. Bosq offers 
four, five and nine course menus. Bosq is the only restaurant in 
Colorados Third Congressional District to earn the Michelin star.
  Bosq is set apart not only by its exceptional cuisine but its 
commitment to our Colorado community. The restaurant collaborates with 
local farmers and ranchers to ensure that the food is as fresh as it is 
delicious. They embody the very best of Colorado excellence and have 
brought a world-class dining experience to Colorados Third 
Congressional District.
  Bosq is a beacon of what can be achieved when talent, dedication, and 
love for ones community come together, and I am incredibly proud to 
represent this outstanding establishment. Mr. Speaker, I urge my 
colleagues to join me in congratulating Bosq for being awarded the 
Michelin star and redefining culinary excellence in Colorados Third 
Congressional District.
I rise today to recognize Ms. Maria Gamboa, 
an English for Speakers of Other Languages (ESOL) Interpreter in the 
Okaloosa County School District. As an employee with more than 25 years 
of service, Ms. Gamboa worked in Exceptional Student Education (ESE) at 
Crestview High School for 13 years before spending the past 14 years as 
an ESOL Interpreter at Pryor Middle School and now Choctawhatchee High 
School.
  At Choctaw, Ms. Gamboa offers academic support both in the classroom 
and in the afterschool tutoring program. She provides the right level 
of encouragement while also holding students accountable for attending 
school and taking advantage of the opportunities which lead to 
graduation. Ms. Gamboa has also assisted in implementing a monthly 
English Language Learners (ELL) Parent Information Night to better 
inform families about high school life. Furthermore, she assisted in 
creating a weekly language acquisition class for any ELL family that 
wants to strengthen their English skills.
  According to her principal, Michelle Heck, Ms. Gamboa has ``earned 
the respect, admiration, and love of our Choctaw staff because of her 
kind-hearted self, always making time to lend an ear to any and all who 
need someone to listen, bountiful amounts of patience and her endless 
generosity to our students, parents, and staff members alike.
a mother to five Okaloosa County School graduates, all 
of whom have received college scholarships. She is a firm believer that 
every family deserves the opportunity to be equipped with the necessary 
resources to help their child succeed in their

academic life. She expressed her gratitude, saying, ``I am very blessed 
to be able to help Spanish speaking parents and students be successful 
in school. I, along with all of Northwest Florida, thank Ms. Gamboa 
for her hard work and dedication to her students and this community.
  On behalf of the United States House of Representatives, I am 
privileged to recognize Ms. Gamboa for her contributions to Northwest 
Florida.
I rise in recognition of the life and legacy 
of Norman G. Sanborn, a World War II veteran and active volunteer who 
was a friend to many in New Hampshire. A native Granite Stater, Norman 
lived a life of service from his time in uniform through the last 
several decades as an advocate for his fellow veterans. Today I want to 
recognize Normans clear commitment to his community and his country, 
and extend my sincere condolences to his family, friends, and large 
network of loved ones.
  Born and raised in Rochester, Norman spent his life in service to our 
state and nation. In 1945, at the age of 16, Norman left high school to 
join the Merchant Marines, sailing through dangerous waters on cleanup 
missions as the War came to a close. Upon returning to New Hampshire, 
Norman met his wife Ruth and together they raised their three children. 
For many years Norman was an effective and experienced car salesman, 
working at a number of dealerships in the region. In his retirement 
Norman became an advocate for veterans, spending his days educating 
school children on World War II, visiting veterans in local nursing 
homes, and hosting his very own television broadcast interviewing 
fellow servicemembers. As a member of many fraternal and veteran 
organizations, including the American Legion and the Knights of 
Columbus, Norman deepened his community ties, cultivating lasting 
relationships with his neighbors. While we can never fully repay our 
debt of gratitude to Norman, we recognize his commitment to service and 
immeasurable impact on our state.
  Today as we remember Nomans life, we celebrate his commitment to 
supporting those around him. I commend Norman for his deep sense of 
duty to our state and country, and I want to once more offer my sincere 
condolences to his family and loved ones. I enjoyed our conversations 
and his sense of humor every time I would visit the New Hampshire 
Veterans Home in Tilton. Normans compassion and purpose for which he 
served, to better the lives of those around him, is an inspiration to 
all who knew him. On behalf of the constituents of New Hampshires 
First Congressional District, I thank Norman for his unwavering sense 
of service.
I rise to recognize constituents 
of Alabamas Second Congressional District and their participation in 
the 2023 Farm and Land Exposition hosted in Mobile, Alabama on August 
10-13, 2023 by the Alabama Farmers Federation.
  My constituents, Daniel Free of Elmore County, Sarah Temple of 
Houston County,

Gracie Woodall of Houston County, and Caleb Connor of Montgomery 
County, participated in the discussion meet competition. Will Kirkland 
of Henry County and Nathan Parker of Houston County participated in the 
Excellence in Agriculture competition.
  While remaining good stewards of their land, these folks have also 
been gracious neighbors by extending their knowledge and expertise to 
others. The evident dedication to agricultural production by these 
young producers and families makes me hopeful for the industrys 
future.
  These young farmers have embodied exactly what it means to have a 
servants heart while taking care of their land and their communities. 
1 Peter 4:10 says, ``As every man hath received the gift, even so 
minister the same one to another, as good stewards of the manifold 
grace of God. The Second Congressional District of Alabama is 
fortunate to have outstanding individuals like them.
  I would like to recognize these young producers for their 
participation in this years young farmer competitions and their 
dedication to production agriculture in Alabamas Second Congressional 
District. The farmers and producers in Alabamas Second Congressional 
District have created a remarkable legacy of feeding and supporting 
citizens across the great state of Alabama and the Nation.
I rise today to recognize Wendy Pate, City 
Councilwoman for the City of Trenton, on the occasion of her 
retirement. The dedication and love that she has shown to her community 
during her tenure is worthy of commendation.
  Wendy is a lifelong Downriver resident, and she and her husband, 
Carl, have lived in Trenton for the last 19 years. Together they have 
two children, Daphne and Carl III. Her family has been volunteering in 
community activities for years, including working with the local Boy 
Scouts and events put on by the Trenton Business Association, the 
Trenton Educational Foundation, and the local Student Council. Wendy is 
a retired high school math teacher and MEA-retired member. She served 
as MEA-RA, class congress sponsor, and staff morale committee chair.
  Wendy was elected to the Trenton City Council in 2019. She was a 
member of the City Beautiful Commission and is a member of the Trail 
Town Advisory Committee. She also co-founded a community action group, 
the DCC Coal Grant Riverfront Community Group, whose mission is to 
support the Trenton Coast Resiliency Master Plan and engage residents 
to support sustainable uses for Trentons waterfront and revitalize 
their downtown. Wendy also spearheaded the project to paint murals on 
West Jefferson Ave in order to beautify a main intersection in Trenton 
as well as celebrate their 2021 designation as a Pure Michigan Trail 
Town.
, I ask my colleagues to join me today in recognizing 
Councilwoman Wendy Pate for all that she has done for the City of 
Trenton. Both in her position on the city council and in her private 
life, Wendy has worked tirelessly to make Trenton and the Downriver 
area healthier and more sustainable for future generations. I thank 
Wendy.
Title IV of Senate Resolution 4, agreed to by the Senate of February 
4, 1977, calls for establishment of a system for a computerized 
schedule of all meetings and hearings of Senate committees, 
subcommittees, joint committees, and committees of conference. This 
title requires all such committees to notify the Office of the Senate 
Daily Digest--designated by the Rules Committee--of the time, place and 
purpose of the meetings, when scheduled and any cancellations or 
changes in the meetings as they occur.
  As an additional procedure along with the computerization of this 
information, the Office of the Senate Daily Digest will prepare this 
information for printing in the Extensions of Remarks section of the 
Congressional Record on Monday and Wednesday of each week.
  Meetings scheduled for Tuesday, November 7, 2023 may be found in the 
Daily Digest of todays Record.

     9 a.m.
       Committee on Appropriations
         To hold hearings to examine the Presidents supplemental 
           request for the Departments of Health and Human 
           Services and Homeland Security.
                                                            SD-106
     9:30 a.m.
       Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
         To hold hearings to examine the philosophy of AI, 
           focusing on learning from history and shaping our 
           future.
                                                            SD-562
     10 a.m.
       Committee on the Budget
         To hold hearings to examine fairness and fiscal 
           responsibility.
                                                            SD-608
       Committee on Environment and Public Works
         To hold hearings to examine accessing clean water 
           infrastructure assistance, focusing on small, rural, 
           disadvantaged and underserved communities.
                                                            SD-406
       Committee on Finance
         Business meeting to consider an original bill entitled 
           ``Better Mental Health Care, Lower-Cost Drugs, and 
           Extenders Act.
                                                            SD-215
       Committee on Foreign Relations
         To hold hearings to examine U.S. national security 
           interests in Ukraine.
                                                            SD-419

     2:30 p.m.
       Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions
       Subcommittee on Primary Health and Retirement Security
         To hold hearings to examine policy considerations for 
           Artificial Intelligence in health care.
                                                            SD-430
       Committee on Indian Affairs
         To hold an oversight hearing to examine fentanyl in 
           Native communities, focusing on Native perspectives on 
           addressing the growing crisis.
                                                            SD-628
       Committee on the Judiciary
       Subcommittee on Intellectual Property
         To hold hearings to examine reforming the Patent Trial 
           and Appeal Board, focusing on the PREVAIL Act and 
           proposals to promote U.S. innovation leadership.
                                                            SD-226
       Select Committee on Intelligence
         To receive a closed briefing on certain intelligence 
           matters.
                                                            SH-219

     10 a.m.
       Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation
       Subcommittee on Aviation Safety, Operations, and Innovation
         To hold hearings to examine addressing close calls to 
           improve aviation safety.
                                                            SR-253
       Committee on Energy and Natural Resources
         To hold hearings to examine the implementation of federal 
           coal mine land reclamation and abandoned coal mine land 
           economic revitalization programs.
                                                            SD-366
       Committee on Finance
         To hold hearings to examine how the tax code affects 
           high-income individuals and tax planning strategies.
                                                            SD-215
       Committee on the Judiciary
         Business meeting to consider an authorization for 
           subpoenas relating to the Supreme Court ethics 
           investigation, and the nominations of Mustafa Taher 
           Kasubhai, to be United States District Judge for the 
           District of Oregon, and Eumi K. Lee, to be United 
           States District Judge for the Northern District of 
           California.
                                                            SH-216

     2:30 p.m.
       Committee on Environment and Public Works
       Subcommittee on Fisheries, Water, and Wildlife
         To hold hearings to examine challenges and opportunities 
           to facilitate wildlife movement and improve migration 
           corridors.
                                                            SD-406
     2:45 p.m.
       Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
       Subcommittee on Emerging Threats and Spending Oversight
         To hold hearings to examine Federal COVID-era spending 
           and preventing future fraud.
                                                            SD-562
     3 p.m.
       Committee on Rules and Administration
         Business meeting to consider S. Res. 444, providing for 
           the en bloc consideration of military nominations.
                                                            SR-301