I rise today to honor and 
congratulate AVANCE for their 50 years of service uplifting Latino 
families to their fullest potential. San Antonio is proud to be home to 
the headquarters of this leading nonprofit, which is dedicated to 
improving the lives of Latino communities through high quality and 
culturally responsible early childhood and parenting education.
  In 1973, San Antonio native Dr. Gloria Rodriguez saw a need to 
address growing systemic racial inequalities in education on our citys 
Westside. Fifty years later, what started out as a program serving 35 
San Antonio families at one housing development project has grown into 
a national-scale operation. AVANCE now serves more than 13,000 
caregivers and children every year throughout Texas and California.
  AVANCE believes that parents are their childs first teacher and that 
home is a childs first classroom, and that thinking guides their core 
Parent-Child Education Program. They work tirelessly to foster economic 
mobility for Latino families by opening the door to opportunity for 
both caregivers and children.
  Over the years, hundreds of thousands of families have been impacted 
by AVANCEs work. By 2030, Latinos will make up nearly 30 percent of 
the American student population.

Our nations prosperity goes hand in hand with the success of these 
students, and organizations like AVANCE that are ensuring that the next 
generation of American leaders have a strong foundation. I look forward 
to many more years of powerful work from AVANCE and endless 
possibilities for Latino families to come.
I rise to commemorate the 50th anniversary 
of the El Paso County Senior Meal Program.
  Since February 1974, El Paso has been assisting seniors across our 
community to receive at least one warm meal a day through the Older 
Americans Act. The program first started at the Sacred Heart Church 
Center and St. Albans Church Center and there are now over 16 centers 
across El Paso. The El Paso County Senior Meal Program ensures that no 
senior goes hungry.
  Today, in partnership with various regional government entities such 
as the City of El Paso, City of Socorro, City of San Elizario, Town of 
Clint, as well as grant funders including the Rio Grande Area Agency on 
Aging and the Texas Department of Health and Human Services, El Paso 
County remains committed to delivering essential services, including 
providing nutritious meals, facilitating socialization, conducting 
wellness activities, and performing safety checks. These services are 
consistently offered across 16 congregate sites, where a dedicated team 
of both staff and volunteers works collaboratively to serve 
approximately 12,057 congregate meals each month. Additionally, an 
impressive 39,000 home-delivered meals are distributed monthly as part 
of this initiative.
  Today, it is my privilege to recognize the significant contributions 
of the El Paso County Community Services Department personnel, as well 
as their partners and the multitude of volunteers involved in 
delivering these essential and crucial services to our community, for 
the last 50 years. I wish them continued success and impact for many 
years to come.
I rise today to recognize and honor the 
career and accomplishments of one of southeastern Connecticuts most 
prominent veterans advocates, Mr. Paul Dillon. Paul has dedicated his 
retirement from his service in the U.S. Navy to being a staunch 
defender of veterans both within his hometown of Gales Ferry, 
Connecticut, and around the southeast region.
  Paul served in the Navy for nearly a quarter century from 1956 to 
1980 and was an exemplary sailor. His service encompassed the Vietnam 
War and his tenure saw him promoted to U.S. Navy Master Chief. After 
service, he became a member of my Veterans Advisory Council, the 
president of the Nautilus Chapter of the Association of the U.S. Navy, 
and more. In 2012, he was befittingly inducted into the CT Veterans 
Hall of Fame. The efforts he has made to protect and serve his country 
reflect his generosity and patriotism. His selfless commitment to his 
community and to veterans from across the country has undoubtedly 
inspired future generations.
  Paul Dillon courageously and honorably served in the Navy during the 
Vietnam War, putting his life on the line to defend our nation. He was 
a Master Chief Radio Man on the USS Oklahoma City and USS Providence 
for three years. Paul rose to the challenge of working over 18 hour 
days, surrounded by constant fire. The stressful conditions of war were 
no match for Pauls tenacious spirit. He continued to work tirelessly 
to protect our country. His presence was integral to the protection and 
preservation of democracy and every Americans liberty.
  Unfortunately, Paul was exposed to Agent Orange during his tours and 
to this day he suffers from the health complications caused from the 
chemical exposure. After his years of active-duty service ended, he 
quickly focused

on advocating for veterans, especially for Blue Water Navy veterans 
like him who suffered from similar service-connected health 
complications. Shockingly, the U.S. Veterans Administration in the 
early 2000s refused to grant ``presumptive eligibility for agent 
orange exposure health illness for veterans of AMERICAS sea services. 
The VAs ``foot on the ground rule granted such coverage for Army and 
Marine Corps ground troops creating an outrageous disparity and 
discrimination against Navy and Coast Guard veterans of the Vietnam 
War. It took 17 years of constant advocacy to finally get Congress to 
pass a new law correcting this injustice. Pauls personal experience 
with the lasting impact of exposure served to enhance his advocacy 
ability, giving him a unique understanding of the hardship endured by 
many Vietnam era veterans. It was an honor for me as his congressman to 
help achieve this hard-fought legislative victory as an original 
cosponsor of this measure.
  When he was appointed as the Northeast Regional Vice President of the 
National Association for Uniformed Services (NAUS), he worked on behalf 
of other veterans to protect and enhance their earned benefits.
  After his retirement from the Navy, Paul joined Sonalyst Inc. By 
1983, he started at Northeast Utilities as a telecommunication manager 
at Millstone Nuclear Power Station, retiring from his second career in 
1997. One year after his second retirement, Paul started at the Retired 
Activities Office (RAO) at NSB New London where he remains today.
  Pauls sense of modesty and obligation to the Connecticut veteran 
community has been evidenced through his numerous volunteer 
commitments. In addition to his work at the RAO, he participates in 
events to honor the veterans of the district, such as when he lays 
wreaths on graves of veterans at the Jordan Cemetery in Waterford as 
part of Wreaths Across America. Moreover, he served the Co-Chairman of 
Kaps for Kids in Groton. With Kaps for Kids, he visits sick children, 
brightening their days, at a local hospital each Veterans Day. His 
attentiveness to those experiencing adversity is heartening and 
inspiring.
  I am honored and privileged to know Paul Dillon on a personal level. 
Paul has been an irreplaceable asset as a member of my Veterans 
Advisory Council. His wisdom surrounding veterans issues is extremely 
useful, it is a pleasure to receive his guidance. He is a dear friend 
of my office and frequently assists on myriad issues relating to 
veteran affairs.
, it is an honor to recognize and immortalize the 
continued works of Paul Dillon. In addition to his distinguished 
service career, he has been a mainstay of the veteran community within 
my district. It is no small consolation to know that model citizens 
like Paul continue to inspire future generations. I ask my colleagues 
in the House to join me in commending and thanking Paul Dillon for his 
endless service to the public.
St. Louis and I rise to honor the life and 
legacy of Mrs. Tonya Latrice Finley-McCaw. Mrs. Finley-McCaw was a 
remarkable servant leader who touched the lives of so many people 
across the St. Louis community.
  A passionate advocate, Mrs. Finley-McCaw fought tirelessly for the 
rights of families and workers, including aiding efforts across the 
region and state for living wages and the right to unionize. Together, 
alongside her inspiring son and a stalwart community leader, Rasheen, 
the pair were never far from a picket line, joining striking workers 
and allies demanding fair wages in the ``Fight for $15 movement.
-McCaw was indefatigable. In addition to her strong 
support of labor rights and economic justice, she also chaired St. 
Louis Citys Moms Demand Action chapter in an effort to tackle the 
crisis of gun violence in our communities and received several 
leadership certificates and accolades for her wide-ranging work and 
advocacy throughout the St. Louis region.
  Born on July 7, 1970, in Chicago, Illinois, to her loving parents, 
Samuel and Dorothy Finley. She was also blessed with an amazing sister, 
Teijuania Finley. Finley-McCaw attended and graduated from Parkway 
South High School, where she was crowned prom queen. She later pursued 
higher education at St. Louis College of Health Careers and obtained 
her certification as a phlebotomist.
-McCaw was married to the love of her life, Rick McCaw, 
for 27 years. She is the proud mother of three sons: Rashaad Crawford, 
Rasheen Aldridge, and Rasheed Finley. She is the stepmother to Rickey 
McCaw, Rikeyia McCaw, Malik McCaw, and Bernard Wings. When she wasnt 
spending time with her family or working to improve the lives of her 
St. Louis neighbors, Mrs. Finley-McCaw loved to cook (especially on 
holidays), play with her dogs, travel, and spend time with her 
grandchildren.
-McCaw was a great friend and mother figure to many. I 
have fond memories of her. I have fond memories of her helping to 
support me as I worked hard to represent the people of Missouris First 
District. She provided unparalleled guidance and never faltered in the 
work of ensuring St. Louis has the representation it deserves at every 
level of government, I got to witness what a remarkable human she was 
to those around and what an incredible mother she was through my 
personal friendship with Rasheen. She touched so many of our hearts and 
she will be deeply missed. May her memory forever be a blessing.
today, I introduce the Northern Mariana 
Islands and American Samoa College Access Act, which would authorize 
tuition assistance grants to cover the difference between in-state and 
out-of-state tuition costs for Marianas and American Samoa community 
college graduates seeking to attend a four-year public university.
  The importance of having an educated citizenry is a bedrock principle 
of our nation and has been since our founding. And in todays 
competitive job market, a postsecondary education is increasingly 
becoming a critical necessity for obtaining a decent job with a decent 
wage.
  The Northern Mariana Islands has only been part of America for forty-
five years. We understand well that education is key to our continued 
growth, but the reality is that household incomes in the Marianas are 
less than half the national median. The U.S. territory of American 
Samoa is in similar economic straits. Poverty and unemployment rates 
there are among the highest in the country.
  I believe the best way to improve economic conditions in these 
territories is to improve the educational opportunities available to 
our residents. Unfortunately, however, neither the Marianas nor 
American Samoa have a four-year institution of higher education. In 
fact, they are the only U.S. states or territories in the country 
without a public four-year college or university. Each has an 
accredited community college, but academic offerings are substantially 
limited.
  Students from these U.S. territories wanting the advantages of a 
four-year university in another state or territory face significant 
financial difficulty. Nonresident students spend an average of $16,380 
in out-of-state tuition and fees more per year than their resident 
peers at public four-year colleges, according to College Board. That 
$16,380 differential puts a four-year college degree out of reach for 
many students from our islands where the median household income is 
$30,000. And many students in the Marianas and American Samoa wanting 
to attend a four-year university not only face the cost of out-of-state 
tuition, but also the significant expense of travel. The Marianas is 
over 3,700 miles from the nearest state, Hawaii--a $1,100 one-way trip 
by plane. American Samoa to Hawaii is over 2,500 miles, which is over 
$800 one-way.
  The bill follows the model of P.L. 106-98, the D.C. College Access 
Act, which allows students residing in the District of Columbia to 
apply for grants to help pay the cost of attending colleges outside 
D.C., but much smaller in scope and cost. My legislation creates a 
program through which public four-year schools in the 50 states, D.C., 
and other U.S. territories may be reimbursed for offering in-state 
tuition to undergraduate students from the Marianas and American Samoa.
  The gentlewoman from American Samoa, Mrs. Radewagen, is an original 
cosponsor of the bill. I urge my colleagues to support this bipartisan 
legislation and help give students from the Marianas and American Samoa 
the means needed to make their educational dreams a reality.
I missed the votes because of travel 
complications. Had I been present, I would have voted Yea on Roll Call 
No. 32, and YEA on Roll Call No. 33.
the deceptively titled ``Protect 
Communities from DUIs Act uses a catchy name to mask the true intent 
of the bill. This flaw led me and others who care deeply about public 
safety and the threat of drunk drivers to oppose. There are already 
existing laws that make someone deportable if they are convicted of a 
``crime involving moral turpitude, where the crime--including a 
serious DUI--is punishable by imprisonment of one year or more.
  H.R. 6976 would expand current law for individuals who have been 
convicted of a single misdemeanor. This could include a legal resident 
who is 50 years old who had a single offense at age 18. Disrupting 
families and communities in such a case doesnt make sense and public 
safety would not be served.
I rise today to recognize Marian 
MacFarland, a remarkable constituent from my district who is about to 
celebrate her 100th birthday. Marian was born on February 13, 1924, in 
Eldred, Pennsylvania, moved to Feasterville, and now resides in 
Newtown, Bucks County.
  Marian Edgar graduated from Eldred High School, in Eldred, PA. She 
moved to Philadelphia, PA working at a Munitions Plant where she met 
John Russell MacFarland. Russ worked at the Naval Yard as the Chief 
Petty Officer in charge of repairs and re-outfitting the Naval ships. 
Marian and Russ were married on January 17, 1948, after he came home 
from World War II.
  Marian and Russ moved to the suburbs in 1952, building their dream 
home together in Feasterville, PA. Marian worked for Strawbridges 
department store in Philadelphia before starting a family. She and Russ 
are blessed with two sons, John and David, and one daughter, Jean 
Marie. She also has six grandchildren, and seven great grandchildren. 
She is immensely proud of the many family ``get togethers at her home 
where the main course was always chips and dip served with tuna 
hoagies.
  Marian made her move to Buckingham Valley Rehabilitation Center with 
ease, making new friends as she shared her joys of life. She still 
enjoys gardening, working in the yard, trimming her plants, and 
attending to her flowers daily. Marian loves dancing, and she insists 
that it is what kept her in such great shape all these years. She loves 
her pet therapy visits and a nighttime snack with her roommate. 
Everyone who knows Marian would agree that her sweet tooth is her top 
priority.
  Marian has an enthusiastic sense of humor and imagination. She loves 
to reminisce with her daughter Jean and son-in law, Bill about lifes 
great memories, while her son David always comes for nightly visits. 
Marian has created lasting memories that affect every person she has 
encountered thus far in her life, and it is my fervent hope that she 
continues her positive impact on our community, district, and country.
, I ask my esteemed colleagues in the U.S. House of 
Representatives to please join me in extending our heartfelt 
congratulations, sincere well-wishes, and all of Gods Blessings to 
Marian MacFarland on the celebration of her 100th Birthday.
I am honored to recognize Mr. Quentin Roman 
Stambaugh on the auspicious occasion of his 100th Birthday on February 
8, 2024.
100 years to the 
honorable service of our Nation. He first reported for duty on 6 April 
1943, to then-Camp George G. Meade, where he enlisted in the U.S. Army 
Air Corps, and then completed Basic Training in Miami Florida. He was 
assigned to the U.S. Army Technical School in Sioux Falls SD, where he 
trained to become a Radioman and Mechanic. He progressed to Yuma, AZ as 
a Gunnery School trainee, and learned to operate the B-25/Mitchell 
Aircraft. After vigorous training, he was deployed to the Southwest 
Pacific region at the height of WWII, serving as a Radioman and Tail 
Gunner, and making his mark on our Nation as part of ``The Greatest 
Generation.
38 Combat Missions, during which he had 
four take downs against the Japanese enemy, and numerous enemy 
installations. He earned the Expert Marksman badge, the Presidential 
Unit Citation, and a personal letter to his parents from General George 
Kenney, Commander of Allied Forces in the Southwest Pacific. In the 
letter, General Kenney cited Mr. Stambaughs ``Meritorious Achievement 
while participating in aerial flights in the Southwest Pacific area 
from February 25, 1945 to March 30, 1945 . . . and noted his service 
as ``. . . a real and very tangible contribution to victory and 
peace. General Kenney further stated that ``I would like to tell you 
how genuinely proud I am to have men such as your son in my command, 
and how gratified I am to know that young Americans with such courage 
and resourcefulness are fighting our Countrys battle against the 
aggressor nations. You have every reason to share that pride and 
gratification. Mr. Stambaugh, having brushed with death numerous 
times, never forgets his Brothers-in-Arms who made the ultimate 
sacrifice for our Nation, fellow Warriors, and our way of life.
  Returning home after earning an Honorable Discharge on 18 December 
1945, Mr. Stambaugh transitioned to civilian life at PH Gladfelter in 
Spring Grove, and earned a Magistrate position in York County--further 
serving our Nation in a judicial capacity for four consecutive six-year 
terms. Mr. Stambaugh and his wife, Bertha, had three children, and he 
still lives in the home he and Bertha built together near his childhood 
home in Spring Grove.
, Im honored, privileged, and humbled to celebrate Mr. 
Quentin Roman Stambaugh on the blessed occasion of his 100th Birthday. 
His tireless, selfless, and dedicated service of our communities, 
Commonwealth, and Nation sets the standard by which we should all be 
judged. I wish him continued Godspeed.
I share my colleagues support 
for H.R. 5585,

the Agent Raul Gonzalez Officer Safety Act, H.R. 6678, the Consequences 
for Social Security Fraud Act, H.R. 6679, the No Immigration Benefits 
for Hamas Terrorists Act, and H.R. 6976, the Protect Our Communities 
from DUIs Act.
  Our Nation is amid unprecedented chaos at our southern border. Every 
day, thousands of illegal aliens are flooding over the border and into 
our cities, increasing crime at alarming rates. The rise of unabated 
human trafficking at our southern border should be among our greatest 
motivations for meaningful action. While some illegal aliens are 
fleeing oppression and poor economic conditions in their countries, 
many of them are trafficking large quantities of drugs, weapons, and 
other contraband. At a time when Americans are dying from fentanyl and 
other drug overdoses at catastrophic rates, we must do everything in 
our power to slow the stem of trafficking. Moreover, with surges in 
violent crime across our country, we need to ensure that our federal 
immigration authorities have the resources necessary to remove illegal 
aliens who commit crimes against innocent Americans.
  Each of these bills aim to empower federal authorities to reject or 
remove illegal immigrants who commit certain crimes. This includes 
aliens who intentionally evade border patrol agents or law enforcement 
assisting those agents; aliens who commit social security fraud; aliens 
who are convicted of driving under the influence; and aliens who are 
members of the Hamas terrorist group or involved in the October 7, 2023 
attack on Israel.
  We must take action to make the United States safer, and I am proud 
to support these efforts to do exactly that.
I share my colleagues support 
of H.R. 7024, the Tax Relief for American Families and Workers Act. 
This bill is pro-growth, pro-small business, pro-family, and will truly 
help our people in southern and eastern Kentucky.
  I want to first point out that this bill will help folks in my 
district who are still recovering from the devastating flooding that we 
endured in 2021 and 2022. The recovery process has been long and 
difficult, and this bill takes important steps to make it easier for 
flood survivors to deduct their losses by eliminating minimum loss 
requirements and not penalizing individuals for compensation they 
received. Our people need all the help they can get, and this bill will 
help us move forward and build back stronger than ever.
  This bill will also help our families struggling with the lingering 
impact of inflated high prices by expanding access to the child tax 
credit, eliminating the penalty for larger families, and ensuring that 
the tax credit is adjusted for inflation, so this benefit isnt reduced 
over time. This will truly make a difference for the people of 
Kentuckys rural Appalachian region.
  This tax relief bill will also boost our economy, jumpstart 
innovation by allowing businesses to deduct research and development 
costs immediately, which will enable us to always be at the forefront 
of the world economy. It will also help small businesses by 
incentivizing capital investments, enabling them to boost their growth 
and increase productivity. Finally, this bill eliminates wasteful COVID 
era spending by accelerating the deadline for backdated claims under 
the employee retention credit.
  This credit system has experienced rampant fraud and abuse, and its 
elimination will save hardworking Americans taxpayer dollars.
  I am proud to support this legislation, and urge the Senate to 
consider it quickly to provide much-needed tax relief in southern and 
eastern Kentucky and across our great Nation.
I rise today to honor and praise an 
extraordinary American, Stanford Womens Basketball Coach, aka `T 
Dawg, Tara VanDerveer. On January 21, 2024, she won her 1,203rd game, 
setting an all-time record for the most coaching wins in the history of 
college basketball. She achieved this in 45 seasons and has led her 
team to three N.C.A.A. champIonship victories.
  Tara VanDerveer is the daughter of Dunbar and Rita VanDerveer and was 
born in Boston in 1953. She didnt play basketball at her first high 
school, but she played when she transferred to Buffalo Seminary in her 
junior year. She attended Albany University where she played as a 
freshman, then transferred to Indiana University, Bloomington where her 
team reached the AIAW Final Four.
  After college, Tara took an unpaid assistant coaching position at 
Ohio State where she quickly ascended to Assistant Coach and Head JV 
Coach. She then became Head Coach at the University of Idaho. She 
returned to Ohio State as Head Coach for the 1980-1981 season and left 
to become Stanfords Head Coach in 1985. Her record at Stanford was 27-
5 by her third year, and her team earned a bid to the N.C.A.A. 
tournament in 1988 and has done so every year since. In 1989 Stanford 
won the Pac-10 regular season and in 1990 reached the Final Four. Tara 
took a one-year leave from Stanford to coach the U.S. Olympic team, 
winning the Gold at the 1996 Olympics in Atlanta.
  Tara is loved by her players and is known for her fairness and her 
moderate temperament. Her rules for leadership success include having a 
vision for her team, maximizing each players strengths, and minimizing 
their weaknesses. She wants her players and staff to complement her, 
not compliment her, and she always remembers her fathers advice that 
you `cant win the Kentucky Derby on a donkey. She is a good listener 
and a constant learner who credits her parents for teaching her the 
most about leadership.
  Tara VanDerveer and the Stanford Womens Basketball team have brought 
entertainment and joy to legions of fans. Home game nights are 
sacrosanct for the teams devotees. They wont miss a game for 
anything. The fans know how much Tara deserves the almost fifty Coach 
of the Year awards she has earned.
, I ask the entire House of Representatives to join me in 
honoring Stanford Womens Basketball Coach Tara VanDerveer. Im 
exceedingly proud to represent her and her teams in the Congress and 
know that all my constituents join me in a huge college cheer for this 
amazing champion. She is widely and affectionately known by her well-
earned sobriquet, G.O.A.T. Tara VanDerveer is indeed the Greatest Of 
All Time. She is a national treasure and a jewel in the crown of the 
16th Congressional District.