I rise today to honor a long-standing 
public servant to the Town of Preston, Connecticut and pillar of our 
states sizable rural population, Mr. Gerald `Jerry Grabarek of 
Preston, Connecticut. Jerry has recently marked his 50th year of 
community service to the Town of Preston and also just celebrated the 
100 anniversary his multi-generational family farm, appropriately 
named, Preston Farms. Most recently, he has won reelection unopposed to 
the Board of Selectman, and was sworn in on the 5th of December. 
Preston and the region are lucky to have such a talented, stalwart 
advocate.
  Jerrys long history of service begins in the early 1970s when he 
and his wife, Deb, took a more active role in managing the farm. During 
this time, they shared responsibility with the farms original 
founders, Andrew and Anastasia Grabarek. Jerry used this time to pursue 
a degree in Biology, Botany, and Zoology from Connecticut College in 
New London, graduating in 1981. This experience proved beneficial 
immediately when he and Deb took over Preston Farms upon the death of 
Andrew in 1984. Jerrys tenure at the farm has been defined by his 
eagerness to engage with his neighbors, often giving fieldtrips and 
hay-rides to Prestons elementary school students. Countless 
generations remember the visit to Jerrys farms with fond memories of 
tractor rides and cups of ice-cream.
  Ever a steward of his community, one of the earliest times Jerry 
opened his farm and maze to local students was in the wake of the 11th 
of September terror attacks on the World Trade Center and Pentagon. 
Many children of Eastern Connecticuts servicemen and women had to 
contend with their parents being suddenly mobilized without explanation 
or words of good-bye. In response, Jerry coordinated field trips to 
Preston Farms free of charge to give those children a much-needed 
respite in the month immediately following the attacks. This episode 
truly epitomizes the selfless, bottom-up service approach which has 
defined Jerrys life.
  In 1978, Jerry began his municipal service in earnest through his 
being voted on to Prestons Democratic Town Committee. Little did he 
know at the time that this action would take him on a winding journey 
of advocacy. By 1982, Jerry served on the Planning and Zoning 
commission wherein he eventually became chair. Jerrys tenure in town 
politics oversaw a significant shift in the dynamic of southeast 
Connecticut living. In 1983, the Mashantucket Pequot Tribe received 
federal recognition and reservation rights which soon saw the 
development of the Foxwoods Resort Casino, causing a large increase in 
the number of visitors to the region. This increase in tourism 
necessitated enhanced infrastructure to accommodate the additional 
traffic. Under his chairmanship of the Planning and Zoning Commission, 
Jerry helped ensure development was executed in a balanced manner to 
avoid undue burden on area residents while still accommodating the 
increased travel.
  Jerrys advocacy for Preston only increased in 1995 when he 
successfully ran for the Board of Selectmen, ending his first term in 
2009. In his early years on the Board, he continued to advocate for the 
needs of residents when weighing responses to the increased traffic 
caused by tribal economic development. In 2020, Jerry rejoined the 
Board and continues his service today.
, I have known Jerry personally for over 30 years and 
consider myself immensely fortunate to call him a friend. Representing 
hardworking, good hearted constituents like Jerry Grabarek is an 
inspiration to me to stay focused on helping people which is his 
trademark. Amazingly Jerry continues to serve even as he surpasses 50 
years of hard work for Preston and the southeast region. I ask that my 
colleagues join me in thanking Jerry for his decades of dutiful 
stewardship.
it is with a heavy heart that I rise today to 
honor the life of my friend and longtime community leader, Pedro 
Cuellar ``Pete Alfaro of Baytown, Texas, who passed away on December 
11, 2023. Pete devoted his life to public service, honorably serving as 
mayor of Baytown, as a city council member, on the Lee College Board of 
Regents, and on numerous other community and non-profit boards. He was 
a leader, mentor, friend, and role model to countless in the region, 
and leaves behind a legacy that will continue to inspire new 
generations of public servants for years to come.
  Pete was born August 10, 1940, to Felipe and Victoriana Alfaro. After 
serving in the United States Army as a basic electronics instructor at 
Fort Bliss for three years, Pete attended the University of Texas at 
Austin. He graduated with a Bachelor of Science in Electrical 
Engineering in 1969 and was a lifetime member of the Texas Exes alum 
association. That same year, he began his career as an electrical 
engineer at Humble Oil and Refining, now ExxonMobil, where he would 
remain employed for the next 31 years.
  After being elected to the city council in 1989 where he served two 
terms, Pete was voted in as the first Hispanic mayor of Baytown, a 
position he held for 11 years. His pivotal role in infrastructure 
development, particularly the completion of the Fred Hartman Bridge in 
partnership with then-Governor George W. Bush, epitomized his 
dedication to building a stronger Baytown.
  However, his reach was not confined to the city hall, it extended to 
significant roles on boards such as the Lee College Board of Regents, 
the Houston Methodist Baytown Hospital Board of Trustees, and the 
Patient and Family Advisory Council. After facing the devastating loss 
of his daughter, Debi, Pete channeled his grief into a steadfast 
commitment to elevating healthcare standards. Chairing the Quality and 
Patient Safety Steering Committee at Houston Methodist Baytown for two 
decades, he worked tirelessly to ensure the surrounding community 
received and had access to top-notch healthcare. In recognition of his 
efforts, the Houston Methodist Baytown Hospital dedicated its new 
state-of-the-art education and training facility in honor of Pete and 
his wife, Lupe, in May of this year.
  Throughout the years, Pete left a significant impact in the public 
and private sector. In fact, he was named the 2004 Baytown Sun 
newspapers ``Citizen of the Year and the 2010 ExxonMobils ``Refiner 
of the Year for his community service.
  Pete was preceded in death by his beloved daughter, Debi Alfaro 
Yarborough. He is survived by his loving wife of 61 years, Guadalupe 
``Lupe Alfaro; daughters, Priscilla Alfaro and Sandra Rodriguez; son, 
Paul Alfaro; and grandchildren, Christopher, Marissa, Austin, Alexis, 
Mikaela, Emily, Nicholas, and Kelsey.
, it is a privilege to honor the memory and legacy of Pete 
Alfaro. My heartfelt prayers are with his wife and loved ones during 
this challenging time. May Pete rest in peace knowing his tenacious 
efforts for the betterment of Baytown, Lee College, and the surrounding 
community will forever be remembered.
I rise today to commemorate the life and 
career of nurse Joyce Grayson of Brooklyn, Connecticut. Joyce was 
killed while serving in her capacity as a visiting nurse, creating a 
chasm in the life of all who knew her that will never be filled. 
Despite the tragedy of her death, Joyces life is remembered for her 
warmth and unbridled vitality--traits that served her well in her 
nearly 40 years of distinguished health service across Connecticut. The 
shocking news of her loss has been felt across particularly in 
Connecticut and by also health professionals across the nation.
  Growing up on a Sterling, Connecticut dairy farm with her 13 siblings 
and parents Robert and Edna Jordan, Joyce is a true daughter of eastern 
Connecticut. From an early age, Joyce recognized her lifes calling lay 
in the care of her fellows. Immediately after graduating from Killingly 
High School, Joyce enrolled in Windham Techs nursing school where she 
became a Licensed Practical Nurse, beginning the journey which would 
define the rest of her life.
  Joyce started her professional career in service to the State of 
Connecticut, working for the Department of Mental Health and Addiction 
Services (DHMAS). Joyces time was well spent at DHMAS given her 
specialty was in behavioral health. During her tenure with DHMAS, she 
worked at a variety of institutions--from the old Norwich State 
Hospital to the Southeastern Mental Health Authority. After working for 
the State for over a quarter century, Joyce continued her service-
oriented work by becoming a visiting nurse for the Elara Caring company
  Ever committed to providing for others, Joyce also served 
Connecticuts next generations by acting as a foster parent. Joyces 
parenthood, whether for her six biological children or those she 
fostered, was defined by her infectious love for each child. In 2017, 
Joyce was recognized for her consummate care and named Foster Parent of 
the year alongside her husband, Ronald, by the Connecticut Department 
of Children and Families.
, the profound loss experienced by the Grayson family in 
the wake of Joyces death is unimaginable. Despite the overwhelming 
tragedy of this situation however, our state and Nation can take solace 
in the knowledge that the legacy Joyce has left behind will continue to 
imbue the world with her kindness and care. And hopefully the 
circumstances of her passing will spur meaningful change in our nations 
workplace rules to protect ``the caring professions that she so nobly 
personified. Joyce touched thousands of people throughout her life, 
whether as a nurse working for Connecticut or Elara Caring, or in her 
capacity as a foster mother. Her works have inspired two of her 
children to follow in her footsteps and serve in healthcare. We mourn 
with Joyces family, including her husband Ronald; children Elliot, 
Kyle, Kaitlyn, Evan, Audrey, Shawn, and their spouses; her four 
grandchildren; and her eleven siblings. To these ends, I ask my 
colleagues to join me in etching the life and legacy of Joyce Grayson 
further into stone, and enact legislation to better protect health care 
providers like Joyce from the violence they all too often face.
I rise to thank Mr. Thomas Branin, 
Supervisor for the Three Chopt Magisterial District on the Henrico 
County Board of Supervisors, for his years of service to Henrico.
, known to everyone in the community as Tommy, has 
represented thousands of community members--including me--over the last 
eight years with distinction--and with his beloved dog Newman, by his 
side. He has been a strong advocate for growing Henricos economy, 
increasing pedestrian and cyclist safety, and bringing Henrico 
together.
  After his election to the Henrico County Board of Supervisors, Tommy 
became the first Henrico Supervisor to place crosswalks throughout the 
entirety of his district. His focus on safety made it possible to 
install 14 miles of sidewalk in his communities--making it safer for 
pedestrians, runners, and bikers alike. His focus on community building 
made it possible to bring pickleball courts, bike tracks, and cricket 
games to his district. And his focus on the betterment of Henrico 
County drove his work to help facilitate the construction of two new 
high schools, replacing aging structures to provide Henrico students 
with a strong and healthy learning environment.
  Tommy has proven to be a strong collaborator and leader. He has 
worked hard with regional partners to connect Henrico County and has 
encouraged partnerships at all levels to provide his constituents with 
better parks and trails to promote healthy, active lifestyles. Tommy 
has been a strong, passionate advocate for safety and his work to 
improve walkability throughout Henrico will continue to have a positive 
impact in the community.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in thanking Mr. Thomas 
Branin, whom I am proud to call a friend--except on days when Tucker 
plays Freeman--for his service on behalf of the Three Chopt District 
and the entire Henrico County community and for his contributions to 
making Henrico a safer place for all.
Im excited to announce the winner of the 
first annual Virginias Fourth Congressional District Veteran of the 
Year.
H. Talley, Jr. dedicated 34 years of his life to the 
United States Army and continues to serve the district with integrity.
11th terrorist 
attacks that shook our Nation before he deployed to Afghanistan to 
fight against those same attackers.
  He served his country with distinction and rose through the ranks 
before his retirement in 2018 as a Chief Warrant Officer Four.
  Now, he uses his specialized skills and years of experience in the 
Army and as an American Culinary Federation Certified Executive Chef to 
serve as the Quality Assurance Manager for the Joint Culinary Center of 
Excellence at Fort Gregg-Adams.
  In this capacity, he works to assess and improve the food for the 
entire U.S. Army in the battlefield environment.
  He also continues to serve and give back to our community as the 
current president of the Nu Omicron Lambda chapter of Alpha Phi Alpha 
Fraternity, Incorporated, where he organizes service events in 
Petersburg and the surrounding areas.
  He devotes his time to lecture Warrant Officers every year and young 
aspiring professionals at Virginia State University.
  As we celebrate Veterans Day this weekend, I am proud to name Chief 
Warrant Officer Four Charles H. Talley, Jr. as Virginias Fourth 
Congressional District Veteran of the year.
St. Louis and I rise to wish a happy 103rd 
birthday to Willie James Thomas, Sr. On behalf of Missouris First 
District, we are thankful for everything he is and everything he has 
done to provide for his family, neighbors, coworkers, and friends.
  103 is a remarkable milestone and worthy of great celebration. Mr. 
Thomas has seen and lived through segments of history that most of us 
can only rely on through books and education, and from being in close 
community

with elders like him. His trials, triumphs, and everything in between 
are a beautiful testament to a remarkable and full life.
  Throughout his life, Mr. Thomas has had many blessings. He is the 
beloved father of three, a grandfather of 10, a great-grandfather of 
21, and great-great-great-grandfather of six. As a World War II Army 
Veteran serving in England, France, and Germany, we thank him for his 
dedication to his family and service to our country.
  I am so grateful for the opportunity to celebrate his life because it 
is an inspiration to so many of us in St. Louis. I wish Mr. Thomas 
peace and continued joy tending to the best yard in University City 
throughout his 103rd year.
  Happy birthday and bountiful blessings to Mr. Willie James Thomas, 
Sr.
today, I introduce the District of Columbia 
Special Elections Home Rule Act. This bill would give the District of 
Columbia complete authority to set the date of special elections for 
local offices, like other jurisdictions. This bill would remove a 
limitation in the D.C. Home Rule Act that is not only inconsistent with 
the self-government granted by the Home Rule Act, but is also harmful.
  In 2012, I got legislation enacted that gave the D.C. Board of 
Elections (Board) more flexibility to set the date of special elections 
for local offices. Although I sought complete authority for D.C. to set 
the date of special elections, the 2012 law did not include this home-
rule principle.
  The Home Rule Act originally required the Board to hold special 
elections on the first Tuesday occurring more than 114 days after a 
vacancy and allowed the Board to schedule special elections on the same 
day as the next general election if that election occurred within 60 
days from when a special election would otherwise have been held. This 
inflexibility led to special elections being held on religious holidays 
and forced D.C. to hold a special election separate from an upcoming 
general election, costing D.C. hundreds of thousands of dollars. The 
2012 law requires the Board to hold a special election on a Tuesday 
occurring between 70 and 174 days after a vacancy.
  This bill is an important step to perfect home rule for D.C. I urge 
my colleagues to support this bill.
I rise today to recognize the 
Central Phenix City football team for winning the AHSAA Class 7A state 
title.
  On December 6, 2023, The Central Phenix City Red Devils left no doubt 
as to who deserves to be state champion, prevailing in a close game 
against four-time-champion Thompson 21 to 19 to secure their title win. 
The game was played at Bryant-Denny Stadium in Tuscaloosa, Alabama.
  The Central Phenix City Red Devils finished their championship season 
undefeated. This was head coach Patrick Nixs first state title victory 
at Central Phenix City and the Red Devils third football state title 
in school history.
, please join me in congratulating Coach Nix, the Central 
Phenix City High School football team, students, faculty and all the 
fans. Go Red Devils.
I rise today to recognize the 
outstanding academic accomplishments of a constituent from my district, 
Deborah Gym.
  Deborah is a sophomore at Central Bucks South High School who 
regularly demonstrates a commitment to academic excellence, with this 
dedication culminating in her achieving a perfect score of 1520 on the 
Preliminary SAT (PSAT). Deborah demonstrated a proficiency in various 
focuses of reading, including information and ideas, craft and 
structure, and expression of ideas, and mathematics, including a 
remarkable understanding of algebra, advanced mathematics, problem-
solving and data analysis, and geometry and trigonometry.
  Deborahs performance on the PSAT should serve as a testament to her 
character as an intelligent and motivated young woman. I am encouraged 
by her motivation to perform incredibly in her academic career, and I 
am proud to represent such remarkable young people in my district.
  It is my hope that, by Deborahs example, students throughout my 
district and throughout the country are encouraged to challenge 
themselves academically, and endeavor to strive for excellence in every 
facet of their lives. Moreover, the example provided by young men and 
young women, like Deborah, should serve as inspiration to challenge 
ourselves and strive for excellence in every facet of our lives.
  I would like to wish Deborah the best in her future endeavors, both 
academically and professionally, and once again congratulate her on her 
incredible performance on the PSAT.
I rise today to recognize Dr. 
William (Bill) A. Snow on his 40th anniversary at Edgewood 
Congregational Methodist Church in Anniston, Alabama.
.
  Under his leadership, the church grew larger and outgrew the building 
on Railroad Street in Blue Mountain. In 1995, the church moved to its 
current location on Brighton Avenue in Anniston. Since moving to its 
current location, the church has had a major sanctuary and fellowship 
hall renovation. Through the years, two building projects have been 
completed. The church has grown over the past 40 years from 50 to 500 
members. Under Pastor Snows ministry, several members have been called 
into the ministry.
  Through Pastor Snows leadership, in June of 2002, Edgewood Church 
built the first permanent structure on Buvuma Island located in Lake 
Victoria in Uganda, Africa. The structure was named The Edgewood 
African Church. It serves as a church, a school, and a medical clinic.
  During COVID-19, the church found new avenues to spread the Word 
through the streaming of services and social media. Financial support 
increased so much during this difficult time that even to this day 
giving remains strong and no formal offering is taken on Sunday 
mornings.
  Edgewood Church is the loving and caring church it is today because 
of the vision and leadership of Pastor Snow and his wife. Inspired by 
its leadership to share the love of Jesus with those in need, Edgewood 
is involved in outreach ministries that make a difference in lives of 
those in the community.
  Pastor Snow will never know on this side of eternity the number of 
people and the families whose lives have been enriched through his 
ministry. Those who have been the recipient of Pastor Snows personal 
ministry through the loss of a loved one can especially testify to the 
spiritual hope and steadfast support he has given.
, please join me in congratulating Pastor Snow on this 
incredible milestone and for spreading Gods Word across our area.
I rise today to recognize the outstanding 
career and service of retiring Houdini Elementary School crossing 
guard, Ms. Cheryl Latza.
  For 44 years, Cheryl has dedicated her time and efforts to protecting 
children throughout the Appleton School District at Houdini Elementary 
School. Given Cheryls kindness and sincere care, she became more than 
just a crossing guard for many students; she also became a friend.
  Cheryl was the first hello in the morning and the last goodbye to 
students on their way home, something that families throughout the 
Appleton area are surely thankful for. Cheryl exhibits the qualities of 
a true community leader, and I thank her for her continued service. Her 
actions will be remembered for many years to come throughout the 
Appleton community.
  Cheryl has dedicated decades of unwavering service to the Appleton 
community, and I urge my colleagues to join me in recognizing her. 
Goodbyes can be difficult, but I wish Cheryl the best in her well-
deserved retirement.
I rise today to recognize and 
celebrate Dana Nally, Principal of Bedford Elementary School, for being 
selected as the 2023 National Distinguished Principal in Iowa.
  In her 16 years as Principal at Bedford Elementary, Principal Nally 
has touched the lives of countless children and faculty. She has 
advocated for student wellbeing and academic growth, and worked to 
create a high-quality, student-first learning environment.
, please join me in commending Principal Nally for her 
extraordinary leadership at Bedford Elementary School. Great leaders 
surround themselves with great staff, which in turn inspires greatness 
in their students. There is no doubt Principal Nally has been a force 
for good in the lives of countless young Iowans and the Bedford 
community.
I would like to take a moment to recognize 
Robert Cabana for his years of service in the National Aeronautics and 
Space Administration. Mr. Cabana is retiring at the end of this year 
after serving as the agencys associate administrator, making him the 
highest-ranking civil servant.
  Robert Cabana acts as the agencys chief operating officer and 
manages more than 18,000 employees. Before serving in his position, Mr. 
Cabana served as the director of NASAs John F. Kennedy Space Center in 
my district. There, he oversaw all NASA facilities and activities at 
the spaceport.
  Robert has spent countless years serving his country, graduating from 
the U.S. Naval Academy in 1971 and commissioning as a second Lieutenant 
in the U.S. Marine Corps. Robert Cabana retired from the U.S. Marine 
Corps in September 2000 as a colonel.
  Robert Cabana has recorded four space flights, logging a total of 38 
days in Space. Cabana was inducted into the Astronaut Hall of Fame and 
named an Associate Fellow in the American Institute of Aeronautics and 
Astronautics and a Fellow in the Society of Experimental Test Pilots. 
He also received the Distinguished Flying Cross, the Presidential 
Distinguished Rank Award, and the National Space Club Florida 
Committees Dr. Kurt H. Debus Award. Col. Cabana is also a recipient of 
the Rotary National Award for Space Achievements National Space 
Trophy.
  I ask my colleagues in the United States House of Representatives to 
join me in recognizing Col. Robert Cabana and his dedication to serving 
his country. While he will be sorely missed, I would like to wish him 
well in his retirement.
I rise today to congratulate Mr. W. 
Kerry Armstrong, Chairman of the Atlanta Regional Commission (ARC), for 
skillfully shepherding the ARC forward as its chairman for the past ten 
years. Kerry will conclude his chairmanship at the end of this year, 
and I know the other members of the Georgia Congressional Delegation, 
who represent the greater Atlanta region, will join me in thanking 
Kerry for his dedicated service on the ARC Board, which will continue 
even as he departs the chairmanship.
  The ARC plays an invaluable role in the health of the Atlanta region. 
Under Kerrys leadership, my colleagues and I have worked successfully 
with the ARC on numerous initiatives important to the region, including 
delivering Older Americans Act services, workforce development, 
regional transportation planning, and homeland security. However, when 
it comes to Kerry and the ARC leadership, there is perhaps no issue as 
singularly important as the protection and preservation of our states 
water supply. In this very critical area, the ARCs work is unrivaled.
  Kerry Armstrong came to Atlanta over thirty years ago, attracted by 
the beauty of the region, and I dare say, of his wife, Wendy, whom he 
met there. Kerry has pursued a successful career in real estate 
development and finance; and over time has served in numerous public-
private roles, including chairing notable community improvement 
districts (CIDs) in the region.
  As Kerry turns the page on this chapter in his life, I want to 
congratulate him, Wendy, their daughter Jenny, and her husband Ben, and 
let Kerry know how much we value him and count on him for advice and 
support. The Atlanta region is richer for his efforts.
  Atlanta Mayor Andre Dickens takes up the gavel this January, as 
incoming Chair; and he will be fortunate to be working alongside ARC 
Executive Director Anna Roach, whose selection Kerry spearheaded. On 
behalf of the citizens in the Atlanta region, we thank Kerry for his 
guiding hand at the ARC, his dedication to our communities, and his 
service to the great state of Georgia.