I rise to recognize the Orange County 
Chamber of Commerce and to congratulate them on a century of unwavering 
dedication to the prosperity and success of businesses in Orange 
County, Virginia.
  Over the last 100 years, Orange Countys businesses and entrepreneurs 
have benefitted from the network and expertise provided by the Orange 
County Chamber of Commerce. A cornerstone of Orange County, the staff 
and members of the Chamber have been a vital force--driving economic 
growth, fostering innovation, and championing the spirit of 
entrepreneurship across Orange County.
  Notably, the Orange County Chamber of Commerce has encouraged 
collaboration through their signature events--the Orange Street 
Festival and the Orange Uncorked Wine Festival. These events have not 
only helped nurture countless businesses and forged valuable 
relationships within the community, but they have also provided 
families across Orange with memorable experiences and fun activities.
  Today, the Chamber boasts a membership of more than 280 Virginians. 
Each member, alongside Chamber staff, leadership, and volunteers, has 
contributed to the success and longevity of the Orange County Chamber 
of Commerce. As their Representative, I wish to extend my greatest 
appreciation for the work the Orange County Chamber of Commerce does to 
support the local economy and improve the lives of residents in and 
around Orange County.
, I ask that my colleagues join me in congratulating the 
Orange County Chamber of Commerce on 100 years of service to Orange 
County, and in celebrating their growth, resilience, and commitment to 
excellence. I look forward to all they will accomplish in years to 
come.
I wish to congratulate the Job 
Corps program on 60 years of dedicated support in changing the lives of 
young Americans. 2024 marks six decades of ambition and hope for our 
young Mainers at the centers in Limestone and Bangor, and throughout 
the United States of America. Maines Job Corps programs are vital for 
preparing young people in the Great State of Maine for high demand 
industry sector employment as well as furthering educational 
opportunities.
  I join my congressional colleagues in honoring and supporting their 
mission to better the

lives of Mainers through technical and academic training. Since the 
first class of students in 1997, the Loring Job Corps Center in 
Limestone has helped students from Maine and across the Nation earn 
high school diplomas, construct long-term careers, and obtain great 
jobs. The Penobscot Job Corps has maintained the same mission for the 
past 45 years.
  Education and community service alike are two of the cornerstones of 
both Job Corps Centers in Maine, resulting in the students not only 
changing their lives but the lives of those around them. The programs 
outreach and development with workforce partners has only enhanced its 
ability to reach out and enrich the lives of young Mainers. The Job 
Corps program encourages the vital education and creativity of bright 
young students throughout our country.
  It is with great pride and appreciation that I congratulate our two 
Maine Centers and Job Corps for 60 years of critical work.
today I joined thousands of people in 
Minnesota who gathered for the public funeral for Burnsville Police 
Officers Paul Elmstrand and Matthew Ruge, and Firefighter-Paramedic 
Adam Finseth who gave the ultimate sacrifice in the line of duty.
  On Sunday, February 18, 2024, these courageous public servants 
answered a call to protect a family and our community, and were gunned 
down in a horrific act of violence. This heartbreaking incident occurs 
amid a crisis of gun violence and domestic abuse, and our first 
responders are on the front lines every day.
  Officers Elmstrand and Ruge dedicated their lives to protecting our 
community. Firefighter-Paramedic Finseth was committed to saving lives, 
as he was attempting to do that day. He also served our Nation proudly 
in the U.S. Army, twice deploying on tours of duty in Iraq. Their 
deaths in the line of duty are a devastating tragedy that touches their 
families, their fellow first responders, the Burnsville community, the 
state of Minnesota, and our Nation.
  I extend my deepest condolences to their families and friends who 
loved them. Their heroic sacrifice will always be remembered and 
honored.
I rise today to honor a special man, Reverend 
Dr. Keith G. Tyler, Sr. from Lexington, Kentucky. His church, Antioch 
Missionary Baptist Church, is celebrating Reverend Tylers 25th 
anniversary as their pastor.
  Reverend Tyler professed a hope in Christ as a child and was baptized 
at the age of eight by the late Rev. A.D. Jones in Louisville, KY. He 
was called to preach the Gospel in 1985 and went on to be licensed and 
ordained. Reverend Tyler accepted the call to serve as pastor at 
Antioch Missionary Baptist Church in 1998. Under his leadership, 
membership has more than tripled. He encourages the delivery of Gods 
word in a variety of methods, including a feed-the-homeless effort, a 
neighborhood bazaar and community festival, a Womens Conference, and 
Childrens Church. He launched a live radio broadcast in 2022. He is a 
motivating speaker, an inspiring preacher, and an innovative leader. He 
enjoys traveling across the nation evangelizing.
  Reverend Tyler is an active leader in the community. He serves many 
organizations, including the Speigel Hill Community Center, the Black 
Faith Leaders of Lexington and Vicinity, and the Central KY Council for 
Peace and Justice. In addition, he is a trustee of Simmons College of 
Kentucky, and he serves on the Community Police Chaplain ``Response 
Team. He is the proud father and grandfather of four children and 
three grandchildren.
  Reverend Tyler is to be commended for his ministry over 25 years at 
Antioch Missionary Baptist Church. I congratulate him and all the 
members of the congregation and wish them many more years of serving 
our Lord. I am honored to recognize Reverend Dr. Keith Tyler before the 
United States Congress.
I rise today to honor five of our precious 
fallen Marines, including Captain Benjamin Moulton, who were killed in 
a helicopter crash last week in California.
  At 27 years old, Captain Moulton was known for his leadership and 
determination. Benjamin grew up with family roots in Emmett, Idaho, and 
received an ROTC scholarship to the University of Washington. Once 
commissioned into the Marines in 2019, Benjamin continued to strive for 
excellence and was promoted to Captain in August of last year.
  Captain Moulton was a decorated pilot who flew with precision and 
skill, navigating through challenges with grace and determination. His 
love for aviation and his commitment to excellence inspired all who had 
the privilege to serve alongside him.
  Our thoughts and prayers go out to the Moulton family and friends as 
they mourn the loss of this remarkable Marine. We are inspired by 
Benjamins bravery and his service to our Nation will never be 
forgotten.
I rise to celebrate the life and 
legacy of Mark Smail, who sadly passed away at the age of 62 on 
February 17, 2024.
  A graduate of Hempfield Area High School and the University of 
Pittsburgh-Johnstown, Mark joined the family business at Smail Auto 
Group and spent the next 40 years establishing the company as an 
institutional pillar of the Westmoreland County business community. 
Mark replaced his father as General Manager in 2018 and became the 
third generation of the Smail family to lead the business.
  Mark distinguished himself through his leadership, business acumen, 
and dedication to the community. The Westmoreland County Chamber of 
Commerce named Smail Auto Group the 2021 Business of the Year, largely 
due to the companys ability to keep all 500 employees on staff during 
the COVID-19 pandemic. Marks continuous participation in industry and 
community associations also earned widespread praise. In recognition of 
his commitment to civic engagement, the Pennsylvania Automotive 
Association awarded Mark the 2021 Bud Smail Political Advocacy Award. 
The award pays homage to Marks late father, who inspired him to work 
hard and give back to his community.
  Mark shared his fathers determination to give back to the community 
and strived to make southwestern Pennsylvania a better place to live. 
As a philanthropist, Mark raised millions of dollars for local 
nonprofits. He contributed to and volunteered with many organizations, 
including the Pittsburgh Institute for Neurodegenerative Diseases, the 
Magee-Womens Research Institute and Foundation, the Troops First 
Foundation, the Westmoreland Cultural Trust, and the Westmoreland Food 
Bank.
  As a devoted husband and father, Mark cherished his friends and 
family. Mark will be remembered by his wife of 35 years, Kelly, and 
their children, Taylor and Marcus. His memory will undoubtedly serve as 
an example of love, devotion to ones family, and selfless service.
, Mark Smail dedicated his life to the people of 
Westmoreland County and southwestern Pennsylvania. His legacy is the 
epitome of a life well-lived. On behalf of the people of Pennsylvanias 
14th Congressional District, I wish his family healing during this 
difficult time.
today I rise to honor the life and legacy of 
a community leader and advocate, Mr. Alan Nishio.
, educator, and tireless organizer. Born in 
the Manzanar incarceration camp in 1945, Mr. Nishio spent his life 
uplifting the Japanese American community in his many roles, including 
as the longest-tenured Board President for the Little Tokyo Service 
Center. Mr. Nishio was also the founder of UCLAs Asian American 
Studies program in 1968.
As founder and co-chair of the National Coalition of Redress/
Reparations, Mr. Nishio worked tirelessly to provide rightful 
compensation to Japanese Americans incarcerated during World War II.
a mover and a changemaker, but a genuinely 
kind individual. Mr. Nishio always focused on the bigger picture, 
emphasizing the importance of building strong relationships between the 
Japanese American community and other communities throughout Los 
Angeles.
, and beyond.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in honoring the life of
I rise today to commemorate the inspiring 
life and noble career of a lifelong Connecticut resident and patriot, 
``Ben Cooper. A member of Americas ``Greatest 
Generation who honorably served in the U.S. Armed Forces in World War 
II, Mr. Cooper witnessed the unspeakable horror of mass casualties and 
genocide that occurred in the European theater. Rather than suppressing 
this experience, he made it a mission to share the unspeakable 
tragedies he witnessed on the frontlines of the War. He transformed his 
experience into lessons for high school students and taught kindness 
and empathy for others. His service and lessons have inspired many 
generations of American citizens to care for each other with the same 
sincerity and dedication seen in Mr. Cooper himself.
  Born in 1921 to Max and Fannie Cooper, Ben is a lifelong resident of 
West Hartford, Connecticut. Ben attended Hall High School and graduated 
in 1940. After attending George Washington University for one year, he 
returned to Connecticut in 1941 and worked at Colt Arms Factory in 
Hartford. Despite not having officially joined the military yet, Ben 
contributed to the war effort through his testing of guns for the Colt 
Company. Come 1942, Ben had been drafted into the U.S. Army as a combat 
medic in the 45th Infantry Division. Soon after his drafting, Ben met 
his wife of 65 years, Dorothy, and they married on July 14, 1944, in a 
Maine synagogue shortly before he was deployed to serve in the European 
theater. Bens selfless nature manifested through his becoming a medic, 
starting a long legacy of sacrifice and consummate service to those in 
need. Through his service, Ben served as a shining beacon in an all-
enveloping sea of darkness. His service safeguarded the life and 
liberty of his fellow citizens and the peoples across Europe.
  Unforgettably, the U.S. Army 45th Infantry helped liberate Dachau 
concentration camp in 1945. Alongside his fellow soldiers, Ben bore 
witness to the deplorable condition of the victims of the concentration 
camp. Darkness and inhumanity enveloped Dachau. The scent of 
incinerated flesh hung heavily on the camps air, and its prisoners 
stood in front of their liberators emaciated, so weak that any attempt 
at nourishment was rejected by their broken bodies. The extent of these 
crimes against humanity and decency left Ben speechless and 
traumatized. He would not speak of the camp or war experiences for 
decades to come.
  In 1990, Ben began to share his wartime experiences. Through an 
interview with a Torrington High School history teacher, Ben was able 
to open up about his personal history. This interview served as the 
genesis of

Bens new mission: to teach Americas future generations of the impact 
of prejudice and bigotry, and to promote kindness and compassion. He 
spoke at many high schools, including Simsbury and Hall, about his 
wartime experiences. His lessons always included advocacy for kindness. 
He brought historical events from textbooks to life through his lived 
memories. Ben hoped that teaching this part of history would ensure 
that it would never be repeated.
  In 2010, Ben met Henny Simon, a liberated victim of the Nazi 
concentration camps. Until her death in 2017, the two visited high 
schools in Connecticut and taught classes on WWII. Students across 
Connecticut gained valuable insight on how precious a thing our 
liberties and rights are, and how fiercely they need to be defended. 
The pair were offered to include their experiences in a documentary 
titled ``In Times of War. Fortunately, their stories have been 
immortalized through their lessons and the documentary and countless 
news articles.
, even in the darkest hour of our civilization, courageous 
truth tellers like Ben Cooper refuse to be silenced by fear or 
indifference. Bens impact on our nations citizens is immeasurable, 
and scores of young citizens will remember his stories and examples. 
Regrettably understanding the savagery of Nazi barbarism is of critical 
importance in the world we live in today. Our country should honor 
Bens gentle kindness and conviction that touched thousands of fellow 
Americans. I ask that my colleagues join me in immortalizing Bens 
story.
I rise today to recognize the important work 
of New Hampshires poll workers and volunteers, who oversaw a safe, 
secure election in the first-in-the-nation primary that took place on 
Tuesday, January 23, 2024.
  For more than 100 years, New Hampshire has been proud to host our 
countrys first presidential primary, an honor our state takes very 
seriously. This primary would not be possible without New Hampshires 
dedicated poll workers and volunteers. This year, like every time 
before, our poll workers demonstrated the power of our democracy and 
the importance of civic responsibility by dutifully and earnestly 
conducting this years election.
  I want to thank these citizens for stepping up for our democracy. New 
Hampshires poll workers continue to set an example for the nation in 
their tireless efforts to count every vote and ensure that the voices 
of all Granite Staters are heard at the ballot box. These poll workers 
prove that despite ongoing efforts to polarize or politicize our 
elections, our American democracy is strong. Granite Stater poll 
workers help inspire increased voter confidence and turnout and ensure 
a smoother process for our states elections. It is critical that all 
communities throughout our state are able to have their voices heard in 
our democracy.
  Poll workers, local town officials, and volunteers are instrumental 
to our electoral process, preserving the right to vote for all 
Americans by remaining impartial and fair throughout the process, from 
overseeing voter registration to processing ballots. All Americans 
deserve to have their voices represented.
, I say thank you again to all of the poll workers and 
volunteers who stepped up to serve their communities and our democracy.
RECOGNIZING OFFICER BRYAN SZOSTAKS SERVICE TO THE CITY OF CANTON
I rise today to recognize Officer Bryan 
Szostak on the occasion of his retirement from the Canton Police 
Department after 25 years of service to the city of Canton, Michigan. 
His decades of service to our community is worthy of commendation.
  Officer Szostak joined the Canton Police Department in 1999 and has 
served as a midnight shift officer ever since. For the past 24 years, 
he has been a member of the departments Honor Guard as one of the 
founding members and leader, with which he has participated in Posting 
of the Colors for ceremonies across the state and funeral services for 
fallen officers. Officer Szostak also served the communitys youth as a 
veteran advisor for the Explorer Unit, a program for teenagers 
interested in law enforcement. In these roles, Officer Szostak has 
showed his emphatic commitment to the units he has been involved in.
  Most notably, Officer Szostak has been a committed Canine Officer for 
the past 20 years. His loyalty and passion for this program has been 
exemplified in his love for his current canine partner Ragnar, who is 
retiring alongside Officer Szostak, as well as his two previous canine 
partners, Poncho and Hoss. In this role, Officer Szostak has set new 
standards for training and policing, which will not soon be forgotten. 
Over the course of his extensive career, Officer Szostak earned many 
department awards, in addition to citizen recognitions for his service 
and commitmment to improving the city.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in honoring Officer Bryan 
Szostak for his remarkable 25 years of service. His commitment to the 
canine program, Canton Police Department, and the City of Canton has 
been dedicated to the safety and improvement of the community. I join 
Officer Szostaks family, friends, and colleagues in extending my best 
wishes to him in retirement.
I rise today in recognition of Ona Marie 
Judge Staines, a New Hampshire woman born in Virginia, who was enslaved 
by George and Martha Washington, and taken by them to Phildelphia 
during Washingtons second term as United States president. Ona Judge 
self-emancipated from their household, as the Washingtons were 
preparing to return to Mount Vernon in their semi-annual effort to 
avoid the Pennsylvania law that enabled enslaved people to sue for 
their freedom if they remained in the state for more than six months. 
Recounting her story in 1845 she remarked on her escape, ``Whilst they 
were packing up to go to Virginia, I was packing to go, I didnt know 
where; for I knew that if I went back to Virginia, I should never get 
my liberty . . .
  During her time in the city, Ona Judge had become acquainted with 
members of Philadelphias large free Black community who provided her 
contact with a ship captain who would take her north. On May 21, 1796, 
she boarded the ship Nancy, bound for Portsmouth, New Hampshire in 
search of freedom.
  The Washingtons relentlessly pursued her, but Ona Judge found a home 
among Portsmouths Black community. Washington learned of her 
whereabouts and sent one of his wifes relatives to convince her to 
return. She refused, saying ``I am free now, and choose to remain so. 
Rebuffed, the man determined to take her and her child back to Virginia 
by force and admitted his intentions to Senator John Langdon. Whether 
it was Langdon who alerted her to the impending capture, or his trusted 
free Black servant Cyrus Bruce, we do not know for sure. But Ona was 
determined to remain free and fled eight miles from Portsmouth into 
Greenland, New Hampshire, where she lived with her daughters and 
friends John and Phillis Jacks and their family until her death in 
1848.
  Several years before her death, Ona Judge Staines told her story to 
two abolitionist newspapers. The interviewer for the Granite State 
Freeman asked her if she ever regretted her decision, and she replied 
``No, I am free, and have, I trust, been made a child of God by the 
means. Her journey exemplifies the power of determination in the 
search for liberty, embodying our state motto ``Live Free or Die. On 
behalf of the constituents of New Hampshires First Congressional 
District, I commend the bravery of Ona Judge Staines to assert her 
right to freedom at any cost. May her story never be forgotten.
I rise today to recognize Robert Lambe on 
the occasion of his retirement from the Great Lakes Fishery Commission. 
His significant service to the Great Lakes and surrounding communities 
during his lengthy career is worthy of commendation.
  Bob Lambe has been focused on serving and protecting our environment 
throughout his career. He holds a Master of Business Administration 
from the University of Western Ontario and is an Electronic Engineering 
Technology graduate from the Cabot Institute of Applied Arts and 
Technology. Bob had a 35-year career within the Public Service of 
Canada. For 6 years, Bob served as the Regional Director General for 
the Central and Arctic regions. Bob was also appointed as the first 
Executive Director for the Invasive Species Centre in Sault Ste. Marie, 
which focuses on research, mitigation and response planning, and 
rehabilitation efforts to combat invasive species that hurt Canadas 
ecosystems. In these roles, Bob has exhibited a wealth of knowledge and 
experience when it comes to natural resource management, and his true 
passion and dedication for protecting and conserving our aquatic 
ecosystems is clear.
  Most notably, in 2013 Bob Lambe joined the Great Lakes Fishery 
Commission, a binational organization based in Ann Arbor, Michigan. 
Here he served as executive secretary for over a decade, as well as 
commissioner and chair of the Commission. Bobs work was invaluable, 
and focused on appropriations, infrastructure, and strengthening 
relationships with other organizations. Bob was also a board member for 
the North American Invasive Species Network, and the Canadian Aquatic 
Invasive Species Network. In all these positions, Bob worked tirelessly 
to serve the organizations and their ability to serve the Great Lakes. 
He emphasized the importance of protecting and sustaining fisheries in 
the Great

Lakes Basin and applying the wealth of knowledge he gained from his 
career to improve the commission. During his time with the commission, 
Bob received high accolades and praise, including a Distinguished 
Service Award from the College of Agriculture and Natural Resources at 
Michigan State University, for his dedication to conservation and 
facilitation of effective cooperative fisheries management.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in honoring Bob Lambe for 
his lifetime of public service. His commitment to the Great Lakes 
Fishery Commission has made a lasting change to the conservation 
efforts of this organization and will not soon be forgotten. Throughout 
his career, Bob has remained reliable and genuine in his work to 
protect our environment. I join Bob Lambes family, friends, and 
colleagues in extending my best wishes to him in retirement.
RECOGNIZING THE MARITIME SECURITY INFRASTRUCTURE COUNCILS PLAN TO 
                              of new york
I rise today as a member of the U.S. 
Merchant Marine Academy Congressional Board of Visitors to thank the 
experts of the Maritime Security Infrastructure Council.
  Recognizing the vital role of the U.S. Merchant Marine Academy in our 
national security and concerned about outdated and deteriorating 
conditions across campus, they assembled a straightforward, multi-year 
plan to bring the campus up to a standard commensurate with its crucial 
function. I am pleased to include in the Record a summary of their plan 
to modernize the Academys 80-year-old infrastructure as well as a link 
to the Full Speed Ahead Plan in its entirety, which can be found at 
  Graduates of the USMMA, one of our Nations five federal service 
academies, make up more than 80 percent of the U.S. Navy Strategic 
Sealift Officer Force. Without these service-committed mariners, the 
Nation would have no assured source of trained, licensed officers to 
crew the vessels which move materiel, fuel and supplies to foreign 
shores in wartime. Without a comprehensive capital improvement plan and 
its timely execution, conditions on the USMMAs Kings Point, New York 
campus will continue to worsen, adversely impacting mission-critical 
training and hindering recruitment of dedicated service-obligated 
midshipmen.
  For far too long, Congress has ignored the infrastructure required to 
provide USMMA midshipmen the specialized education and training they 
need to fulfill their mission. It is now time to make the institution 
worthy of their commitment to serve our Nation.

 Full Speed Ahead: A Plan to Address Critical Infrastructure Needs at 
                    the U.S. Merchant Marine Academy

       Background: In January 2021, the Maritime Security 
     Infrastructure Council (MSIC), a group with expertise in 
     major construction project management and concerned about the 
     deterioration of the U.S. Merchant Marine Academy (USMMA) 
     infrastructure, developed a comprehensive plan to bring the 
     campus up to the standards necessary to prepare USMMA 
     Midshipmen to lead our Nations maritime mission in the 21st 
     century.
       The Full Speed Ahead Plan is an intensive 8-year program to 
     execute a decades overdue, comprehensive modernization: new 
     academic buildings, physical readiness/training facilities, 
     midshipmen morale and welfare spaces, parking structures, 
     faculty and senior staff housing, utilities, IT, and campus 
     security upgrades, and renovations of many existing 
     buildings. This plan is adaptable, e.g., it can be adjusted 
     for longer construction timelines and funding schedules, 
     and--importantly--it is intended to be executed while keeping 
     USMMA fully operational throughout construction.
       Previous cost estimates were $611M in January 2021 and 
     $820M in March 2022. The estimated cost when adjusted for 
     inflation has now risen to $1.02B; additional delay will only 
     further increase the cost of this urgently needed 
     modernization.
       The need: With over 80 years in service to our nation, a 
     comprehensive modernization is long overdue if USMMA is to 
     continue producing world-class, service-committed merchant 
     marine officers who are the backbone of the U.S. Navys 
     Strategic Sealift Officer Force and a crucial element of 
     defense readiness.
       Congress has rightly recognized the necessity of and 
     supported funding modernization projects at the other federal 
     service academies, especially West Point and Annapolis. Long-
     term low funding levels have left the campus under-resourced, 
     and the result is a deteriorating campus that makes 
     attracting a diverse applicant pool and providing state-of-
     the-art mission critical training even more difficult. Many 
     of the facilities date back to the Academys founding in the 
     1940s and are simply not conducive to the immersive training 
     and demanding coursework expected from our Nations five 
     service academies.
       Modern IT is nearly nonexistent in several buildings; what 
     is available cannot accommodate even the most basic digital 
     needs of Midshipmen, let alone support the increasingly high-
     tech vessel systems that they must master.
       Aside from minor Midshipmen Barracks repairs in the 2000s, 
     there have been no renovations or upgrades since 1988. Nearly 
     every building on campus has exceeded its life expectancy and 
     now requires replacement or major renovation.
       This is particularly true of the Academys physical 
     training, leadership readiness, and athletic facilities. 
     Although USMMA was the first federal service academy to admit 
     women in 1974, no additional athletic or training spaces have 
     been provided for female teams in the ensuing 50 years, 
     clearly contrary to the requirements of Title IX. Overall, 
     these limited and outdated facilities are inadequate for 
     Midshipmen to maintain physical readiness standards of the 
     U.S. Navy and other services and adversely impact the 
     recruitment of future Midshipmen. Midshipmen need a purpose-
     built pool, featuring a separate wave pool with high dive/
     jump capabilities in order to accommodate their specific 
     mandatory training needs for rescue and survival at sea.
       The Fix: Our working group of maritime executives, 
     engineers, architects, and construction industry 
     professionals--some USMMA graduates--propose the 
     authorization and funding of a multi-year program of 
     infrastructure replacement and improvement projects.
       The Budget and Timeline Snapshot: We suggest directed 
     funding for foundational design work that will serve as the 
     blueprint for an aggressive eight-year construction and 
     project management program. However, the plan can be readily 
     adapted to meet longer construction timelines and funding 
     schedules, along with any potential project modifications. As 
     of January 2024, the current cost of the plan is $1.02B over 
     eight years.
       The Plan: For decades, concerned stakeholders have 
     unsuccessfully sought to upgrade USMMAs physical plant; this 
     plan reflects much of the quality thinking and hard work that 
     went into earlier plans, which regrettably never came to 
     fruition. This document specifically builds on the input of 
     those earlier planning initiatives.
       This plan details the facilities necessary for the USMMA to 
     preserve its position as the preeminent leader in maritime 
     education in the Nation, today and into the future. It 
     reflects a long overdue acknowledgment that the campus has 
     fallen woefully behind the other four federal service 
     academies and other peer top-tier institutions.
       The plan meets the long-term objectives of the Academy 
     through facilities that will promote modern educational best 
     practices, including globally connected research facilities; 
     engineering powerplant laboratories; 21st century IT-enabled 
     classrooms.
       Support mission critical proficiencies: Standards of 
     Training, Certification, and Watchkeeping (STCW) applications 
     laboratories; Safety of Life at Sea (SOLAS) training pool; 
     Conference and license exam space.
       Promote readiness: Accessible modernized fitness facilities 
     sufficient to enable all Midshipmen to maintain physical 
     readiness standards required of USN Reserve officers; NCAA-
     standard facilities for all athletes; Health and wellness 
     center.
       Facilitate leadership development: Weapons range; enhanced 
     waterfront facilities; band facility.
       Attract a diverse pool of applicants to ensure USMMA 
     enrolls the best and the brightest.
       Provide continuing education and industry engagement 
     facilities: Maritime Center of Excellence for research, 
     innovation, and policy development; MSCE accreditation 
     required post-graduate continuing education opportunities; 
     Maritime industry leadership conference capability.
       Maintain a secure facility and a safe environment: secure 
     campus at a level necessary to protect a federal facility; 
     centralized security/access control at main gate and academy 
     facilities; fencing and monitoring of campus boundaries; 
     cyber-secure, modernized IT network.
       Master Planning Process and Principles: The 82-acre campus 
     is a unique, historically significant property. Our plan is 
     designed to modernize the campus without expanding its 
     current footprint.
       The Education District includes the original 1943 academic 
     buildings, barracks, and

     administrative offices that form the hub of the campus.
       The Waterfront District includes Eldridge Pool, the 
     Memorial Arbors, the Chapel, Yocum Sailing Center, the USCG 
     Station, Samuels Hall and Crowninshield/Cressy Pier.
       The Physical Training and Athletics District includes all 
     the Academys athletic facilities.
       The Community District encompasses all of the McNulty 
     Campus, including faculty housing and the museum. A second 
     community district south of the Education District includes 
     senior staff housing, the Patten Health Clinic, and the 
     Midshipmen Activities Center.
       Program Cost Summary:
       Construction: Academic Center $116M; Activity Center 
     $42.2M; Aquatic Readiness Center $65.6M; Leadership 
     Development and Readiness Center $133.1M; Parking Structures 
     $50.7M; Federal Maritime Center of Excellence $49.1M; Senior 
     Staff/Faculty Housing $12.2M; Crowninshield Pier Replacement 
     $31.7M; Waterfront Sailing Center $19.2M. New construction 
     subtotal: $519.8M.
       Facility Renovation &amp; Upgrades: Samuels Hall Renovation 
     Completion $8.8M; Campus Security and Waterfront Improvements 
     $28.3M; GIS and Upgrade Academy Utilities $95.4M; Main Gate 
     and Campus Security Upgrade $53.9M; Bowditch Hall and 
     Steamboat Road Improvements $76.4M; Existing Building 
     Renovations $94.8M. Facility Renovation/Upgrades Subtotal: 
     $357.6M.
       Design: $91.1M.
       Program Management: $51.3M.
       Total Program Cost: $1019.8M.
       Maritime Security Infrastructure Council Members:
       John D. Cameron, Jr., P.E. Managing Partner, Cameron 
     Engineering &amp; Associates, LLP: Mr. Cameron oversees the 
     firms consulting engineering services, which specializes in 
     public and private sector engineering such as site 
     development, energy management; water quality management 
     planning, waterfront protection and resilience; roadway, 
     drainage, utilities and infrastructure improvement; planning; 
     building systems; building department services, and 
     construction management. The firms work has included major 
     mixed use, residential, commercial and industrial projects as 
     well as brownfields and waterfront projects. He is a frequent 
     spokesperson on regional planning, sustainability, economic 
     development issues for Long Island and beyond.
       LTG Bill Grisoli (Ret.) Distinguished Chair of Civil 
     Engineering and Chair of the Civil Engineering Advisory 
     Board, USMA: LTG Bill Grisoli is currently serving as the 
     Distinguished Chair of Civil Engineering and Chair of the 
     Civil Engineering Advisory Board at USMA. He spent 39 years 
     on active duty and retired in 2015 as the Director of the 
     Army Staff. Prior to his retirement, LTG Grisoli held a wide 
     variety of engineer command assignments at the Company, 
     Battalion. Brigade, and Army Corps of Engineers Division 
     level. His staff assignments include Director of the Armys 
     Business Transformation Office and Director of Program 
     Analysis and Evaluation Office, G-8. LTG Grisoli was born in 
     NYC and graduated from USMA in 1976.
       Lloyd C. Caldwell, P.E. SES, US Army Corps of Engineers 
     (Ret.): Mr. Caldwell served until 2020 as the national 
     Director of Military Programs responsible for the policy and 
     technical functions of the Corps worldwide program for 
     engineering, design, construction, real estate and 
     environmental activities. He was responsible for military 
     construction and installation support at the USMA and the 
     USAFA. From 2005 to 2010, he was the Director of Programs for 
     the N. Atlantic Division responsible for military and civil 
     works and the Director of Programs for the Gulf Region 
     Division in Iraq. He is a Distinguished Military Graduate 
     with a Bachelor of Building Construction degree from Auburn 
     and holds MS in Civil Engineering and MPW degrees from the 
     University of Pittsburgh.
       Capt. Eileen Roberson, USN (Ret.) SES, DOT/US Navy (Ret.): 
     Eileen Roberson is a retired United States Navy Reserve 
     Officer. As a long-time member of the Federal Governments 
     Senior Executive Service, Roberson has served as Director of 
     Total Force Management for the US Navys Military Sealift 
     Command, Assistant for Administration to the Under Secretary 
     of the Navy, Associate Administrator at the Department of 
     Transportations Maritime Administration, and Deputy Program 
     Executive Officer (PEO) for Navy Information Technology 
     Roberson holds a Master of Science degree in Management 
     Information Systems from Bowie State University in Bowie, MD 
     and a BS degree in Engineering from the United States 
     Merchant Marine Academy.
       John O. Arntzen, President, ACTA Maritime Development 
     Corporation: Recently retired as a Senior Program Manager 
     with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, North Atlantic 
     Division at Fort Hamilton in Brooklyn, New York, he helped 
     oversee a $2.4 billion Military Construction program on U.S. 
     Army and U.S. Air Force bases in Europe. Prior to this, 
     Arntzen was Special Missions Ships Project Officer for the 
     U.S. Navys Military Sealift Command. From 2015 to 2019, 
     Arntzen was Chairman of the USMMA Alumni Association and 
     Foundation (AAF). Arntzen holds a M.S. in Transportation 
     Management from SUNY and a B.S., with Honors, in Marine 
     Engineering from USMMA.
Title IV of Senate Resolution 4, agreed to by the Senate of February 
4, 1977, calls for establishment of a system for a computerized 
schedule of all meetings and hearings of Senate committees, 
subcommittees, joint committees, and committees of conference. This 
title requires all such committees to notify the Office of the Senate 
Daily Digest--designated by the Rules Committee--of the time, place and 
purpose of the meetings, when scheduled and any cancellations or 
changes in the meetings as they occur.
  As an additional procedure along with the computerization of this 
information, the Office of the Senate Daily Digest will prepare this 
information for printing in the Extensions of Remarks section of the 
Congressional Record on Monday and Wednesday of each week.
  Meetings scheduled for Thursday, February 29, 2024 may be found in 
the Daily Digest of todays Record.

                                MARCH 6
     9:30 a.m.
       Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
         Business meeting to resume consideration of S. 3664, to 
           require executive branch employees to report certain 
           royalties, S. 3626, to clarify task and delivery order 
           solicitation and contract requirements, S. 3635, to 
           improve the Presidents Cup Cybersecurity Competitions, 
           S. 3613, to require Facility Security Committees to 
           respond to security recommendations issued by the 
           Federal Protective Service relating to facility 
           security, S. 3558, to prohibit contracting with certain 
           biotechnology providers, S. 1524, to ensure that 
           whistleblowers, including contractors, are protected 
           from retaliation when a Federal employee orders a 
           reprisal, S. 3654, to amend the Presidential Transition 
           Act of 1963 to require the timely appointment of agency 
           transition officials, to ensure adequate performance 
           and oversight of required transition-related 
           preparation, to require new guidance for agencies and 
           possible transition teams, S. 3648, to amend the Post-
           Katrina Management Reform Act of 2006 to repeal certain 
           obsolete requirements, S. 3139, to ensure that Federal 
           contractors comply with child labor laws, S. 2367, to 
           improve border security through regular assessments and 
           evaluations of the Checkpoint Program Management Office 
           and effective training of U.S. Border Patrol agents 
           regarding drug seizures, S. 3594, to require 
           Governmentwide source code sharing, S. 3015, to amend 
           title 5, United States Code, to address telework for 
           Federal employees, S. 2143, to designate the facility 
           of the United States Postal Service located at 320 
           South 2nd Avenue in Sioux Falls, South Dakota, as the 
           ``Staff Sergeant Robb Lura Rolfing Post Office 
           Building, S. 2274, to designate the facility of the 
           United States Postal Service located at 112 Wyoming 
           Street in Shoshoni, Wyoming, as the ``Dessie A. Bebout 
           Post Office, S. 2717, to designate the facility of 
           the United States Postal Service located at 231 North 
           Franklin Street in Greensburg, Indiana, as the 
           ``Brigadier General John T. Wilder Post Office, S. 
           3267, to designate the facility of the United States 
           Postal Service located at 410 Dakota Avenue South in 
           Huron, South Dakota, as the ``First Lieutenant Thomas 
           Michael Martin Post Office Building, S. 3357, to 
           designate the facility of the United States Postal 
           Service located at 5120 Derry Street in Harrisburg, 
           Pennsylvania, as the ``Hettie Simmons Love Post Office 
           Building, S. 3419, to designate the facility of the 
           United States Postal Service located at 1765 Camp Hill 
           Bypass in Camp Hill, Pennsylvania, as the ``John 
. 3639, to designate the 
           facility of the United States Postal Service located at 
           2075 West Stadium Boulevard in Ann Arbor, Michigan, as 
           the ``Robert Hayden Post Office, S. 3640, to 
           designate the facility of the United States Postal 
           Service located at 155 South Main Street in Mount 
           Clemens, Michigan, as the ``Lieutenant Colonel 
           Alexander Jefferson Post Office, H.R. 292, to 
           designate the facility of the United States Postal 
           Service located at 24355 Creekside Road in Santa 
           Clarita, California, as the ``William L. Reynolds Post 
           Office Building, H.R. 996, to designate the facility 
           of the United States Postal Service located at 3901 
           MacArthur Blvd., in New Orleans, Louisiana, as the 
           ``Dr. Rudy Lombard Post Office, H.R. 2379, to 
           designate the facility of the United States Postal 
           Service located at 616 East Main Street in St. Charles, 
           Illinois, as the ``Veterans of the Vietnam War Memorial 
           Post Office, H.R. 3944, to designate the facility of 
           the United States Postal Service located at 120 West 
           Church Street in Mount Vernon, Georgia, as the ``Second 
           Lieutenant Patrick Palmer Calhoun Post Office, and 
           the nominations of Adrienne Jennings Noti, Tanya 
           Monique Jones Bosier, Danny Lam Hoan Nguyen, Kenechukwu 
           Onyemaechi Okocha, Katherine E. Oler, Judith E. Pipe, 
           and Charles J. Willoughby, Jr., each to be an Associate 
           Judge of the Superior Court of the District of 
           Columbia.
                                                            SD-342
     10 a.m.
       Committee on the Budget
         To hold hearings to examine how primary care improves 
           health care efficiency.
                                                            SD-608
       Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation
         To hold hearings to examine the National Transportation 
           Safety Board Investigations Report.
                                                            SR-253
       Committee on Environment and Public Works
         To hold hearings to examine extended producer 
           responsibility policies for consumer packaging.
                                                            SD-406
       Committee on Foreign Relations
         To hold hearings to examine global food security.
                                                            SD-419
       Committee on the Judiciary
         To hold hearings to examine pending nominations.
                                                            SD-226
       Committee on Veterans Affairs
         To hold a joint hearing with the House Committee on 
           Veterans Affairs to examine the legislative 
           presentation of Veterans of Foreign Wars of the United 
           States and multiple veterans service organizations: 
           PVA, WWP, NASDVA, MRC, BSF, IAVA, BVA, SWAN, SVA, and 
           AMVETS.
                                                            SD-G50

                                MARCH 7
     10 a.m.
       Committee on Veterans Affairs
         To hold a joint hearing with the House Committee on 
           Veterans Affairs to examine the legislative 
           presentation of Disabled American Veterans.
                                                            SD-G50

                                MARCH 13
     10 a.m.
       Committee on Veterans Affairs
         To hold a joint hearing with the House Committee on 
           Veterans Affairs to examine the legislative 
           presentation of The American Legion and multiple 
           veterans service organizations: JWV, TAPS, NCHV, MOAA, 
           NACVSO, NCAI, VVA, NGAUS, and FRA.
                                                          390-CHOB