I rise today to honor Denver East High 
School--an institution that has been at the heart of my district for a 
century and a half--as it celebrates the centennial rededication of its 
historic building.
  East High opened its doors 150 years ago in 1875 as Denvers first 
high school, setting a foundation of excellence that continues to this 
day. The current building, designed by George H. Williamson, a proud 
member of Easts Class of 1893, was completed in 1925.
  Its iconic 162-foot clock tower, modeled after Independence Hall in 
Philadelphia, has stood as an iconic beacon. In 1991, the building was 
recognized as an official Denver Historic Landmark.
  Over the past 150 years, East High has shaped leaders, artists, 
athletes, and innovators. From First Lady Mamie Eisenhower, to Rock and 
Roll Hall of Famers Philip Bailey and Larry Dunn of Earth, Wind &amp; Fire, 
to aerospace leader Norman Augustine, to head coach of the Detroit 
Pistons J. B. Bickerstaff, East alumni have left an indelible mark on 
our city, our country, and our world.
  Equally impressive is Easts storied athletic tradition, with the 
Angels earning 99 state championships, the third most of any high 
school in Colorado. Generations of students

have worn the red and white with pride, carrying forward the spirit of 
teamwork and perseverance.
  More than its achievements, East High has always been about 
community. This rededication brings together alumni, students, 
teachers, and neighbors to honor its history, connect across 
generations, and create new memories for the future.
  As a lifelong Coloradan and graduate of the Denver Public School 
system, I am proud to recognize East High School for 150 years of 
excellence in education and for the centennial rededication of its 
landmark building.
I am grateful for the 
opportunity to recognize September 16, 2025, as Mexicos 215th 
Independence Day.
  Mexico has served as an invaluable diplomatic, trade, and cultural 
partner with the United States for two hundred years, reflecting the 
close relationship that make this alliance invaluable to both 
countries.

  In 2024, Mexico was the second-largest destination for U.S. exports 
and the top source of U.S. imports. Total U.S. goods and services trade 
with Mexico, in 2024, totaled over $935 billion.
  I am particularly grateful of the trade ties between South Carolina 
and Mexico. In 2024, the Palmetto State exported over three and a one-
half billion dollars of rubber and plastic products, electrical 
equipment and components, iron and steel, and other items to our 
southern partner, while importing more than five and one half billion 
dollars in motor vehicle and aerospace parts, and other goods.
  This integration highlights the deeply connected partnership between 
Mexico and South Carolina.
  I applaud the deep commitment of President Donald Trump and Mexican 
President Claudia Sheinbaum to cooperate and collaborate in stopping 
illegal aliens crossing our Southern Border, including the murderous 
threats posed by drug traffickers with human trafficking. This 
underscores the promise by President Trump to protect American lives.
  This day is also special to me because I have a dedicated member of 
my staff, Daniel Ramirez, who is first generation Mexican-American.
  I am appreciative that the United States and Mexico are partners--and 
neighbors--and wish the people of Mexico a Happy 215th Independence 
Day.
HONORING CARL JOHN McMANUS ON THE OCCASION OF HIS RETIREMENT
I am honored to have this opportunity to 
join the many family, friends, and community members who will gather 
this evening in extending my heartfelt congratulations to New Haven 
legend, Carl John McManus, as he marks his retirement from Phils 
Barber Shop, ending his sixty-year career as a barber.
  Carl began his career as a barber in his hometown of Hopkinton, 
Massachusetts, the path to his calling, and a unique story. While 
working at a local grocery store, Carl befriended the butcher who liked 
to play the horses at Suffolk Downs. Carl used to take his choices to 
the local bookmaker, you guessed it, the town barber. He found himself 
drawn to the friendly atmosphere and what he has described as the 
``kibitzing between the barber and his customers. He soon found 
himself a student at the Massachusetts School of Barbering in Boston, 
the first stepping stone of what would become an illustrious career 
path.
  Following his parents and siblings, Carl moved to New Haven and soon 
found himself a home at Phils Barber Shop. Over the course of his 
sixty-year career, he has met a multitude of people, from the 
Presidents of Yale University to future Presidents of the United 
States, and famous actors to local theater favorites. But the most 
important connection he made was that to an older barber in town who 
worked at the Graduate Club. Carl had noticed a photo of the barbers 
daughter and when he expressed an interest in meeting her, the barber 
arranged a date, despite her slight hesitation. In the end, Carl and 
the barbers daughter, Ethel, were married for nearly fifty years 
before her passing just two years ago.
  Carl did not just give a shave and a haircut; he helped people to 
find themselves. Today, as he celebrates his retirement, Carl can be 
proud of the legacy he leaves. When you sat in his chair, you became 
more than a client, you became a friend. And while he will most 
certainly be missed by many, I am honored to join his daughter, Rose 
and granddaughter, Autumn, as well as all of those who will gather this 
evening in wishing him the very best as he begins this new life 
chapter. I congratulate him on his retirement.
I would like to take a moment to honor one 
of my dear friends, Denice Harlan, as she retires from her role as 
President/CEO of the Giddings Chamber of Commerce.
  Denice moved to Giddings, Texas, in 1983 with her beloved husband, 
Wade. She opened Harlans Restaurant in 1987 to provide delicious 
homestyle cooking. Her passion for service led her to join the Giddings 
Chamber of Commerce and serve as Chamber Director. In addition, Denice 
has also served on the New Horizons Lions Club, Lee County Fair 
Association, and Rotary Club. She was most recently recognized with the 
Giddings Lifetime Achievement Award.
  I want to thank Denice for the devotion she has demonstrated and her 
commitment to serving the constituents of Lee County. I am grateful for 
her leadership, and I send my best wishes to Denice as she begins this 
new chapter in life.
  As a member of the United States House of Representatives, I am 
honored to join her family and friends in congratulating Denice Harlan 
on this momentous occasion.
I rise today to honor Chad Allan Blomgren, 
who passed on July 9, 2025, at the age of 56. Mr. Blomgren was a 
distinguished U.S. Army veteran, a Senior Director at Gilead Sciences, 
and a tireless advocate for veterans through his volunteer work with 
Dream Foundation.
  Chads life was a powerful reflection of his familys legacy of 
service to his country, his community, and his fellow veterans. Raised 
in the Hills-Beaver Creek community of Minnesota, he excelled in high 
school both academically and athletically. These formative years helped 
shape the competitive spirit that remained central to who he was. After 
graduation, Chad enlisted in the Minnesota Army National Guard. Shortly 
thereafter, he met the love of his life, Debbie, and they married in 
1990. He went on to earn his degree from Mankato State University the 
following year.
  Chad honorably served in the U.S. Army, joining a long family 
tradition of service that includes his father, three brothers, niece, 
son, and dozens of relatives. After his military service, he embarked 
on a successful professional career spanning over a decade at Gilead 
Sciences as Senior Director of Managed Markets. For the past five 
years, he co-led the Gilead Veterans Engagement Team (GVET), supporting 
more than 500 employees aligned around the mantra, ``Serving Those 
Whove Served.
  In June 2023, Chad was appointed to the Board of Directors of Dream 
Foundation, the only national organization dedicated to granting final 
wishes to terminally ill adults. He served on its Dreams for Veterans 
Advisory Council since its inception in 2021 and actively participated 
in fulfilling dreams for veterans, visiting at least four recipients in 
person to deliver those special moments of hope and closure. As he 
shared, ``Providing a positive impact for those in the final stages of 
their lives means everything to me. It was a cause he embraced both 
personally and professionally, bringing compassion, leadership, and a 
fighters perspective to the foundations mission.
  Chads life embodies the highest ideals of leadership and service. 
Whether in uniform, guiding colleagues in industry, or comforting 
veterans through Dream Foundation, he lived a life of purpose and 
generosity. His family and colleagues remember him as fun, smart, full 
of laughter, and always ready with a helping hand.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in honoring the life of a 
selfless and honorable man, Chad Blomgren. His dedication to his 
family, his career, his Nation, and his fellow veterans inspires us 
all.
I rise to honor the Vietnam and Korean War 
veterans who traveled to Washington, D.C. on September 17, 2025, with 
Honor Flight Chicago, a program that provides WWII, Vietnam, and Korean 
War veterans the opportunity to visit their memorials on The National 
Mall in Washington, D.C. These memorials were built to honor their 
courage and service to their country.
  The American Veteran is one of our greatest treasures. The Soldiers, 
Airmen, Sailors, Marines, and Coast Guardsmen who traveled here on 
September 17, 2025, answered our Nations call to service during one of 
its greatest times of need. From the Pacific Asian Theatre to the 
Korean Theater, these brave Americans risked life and limb, gave 
service, and sacrificed much, all while embodying what it is to be a 
hero. We owe them more gratitude than can ever be expressed,,
  I welcome these brave veterans to Washington and to their memorials. 
I am proud to include in the Record  the names of these men and women 
for all to see, hear, and recognize, and I call on my colleagues to 
rise and join me in expressing gratitude.

       James B. Ayres, John H. Ball, Richard Banko, James T. 
     Bator, Paul E. Bauer, Dallas Beecher, Jody R. Bennett, Larry 
     G. Bird, Harvester Bond, Eddie. Jr. Brown, Manuel Castillo, 
     Gilbert A. Cipriano, James Cole, Carl Conti, Gregory S. 
     Craig, Thomas M. Curran, William Davis, Jr., Eddie B. Davis, 
     John E. Debner, Thomas E. Duffy, Dwight C. Dwomik, John 
     Engeriser, Kevin Fitch, Rodney E. Franklin, Jay R. 
     Fredrikson, Walter L. Fullilove, John Green, Donald M. 
     Gregory, Jr., Gregory Gremba, Frank F. Gudausky, William E. 
     Haines, Micheal Heavrin, William A. Herod, Kevin M. Holly, 
     Leigh Holzwart, Edward R. Howe, Joseph F. Inserro, Donald L. 
     Iwanski, Robert D. Jarman, Robert A. Johnson, David B. Jones, 
     William E. Kaczmarski, George Kartsounes, Robert A. Kosmicki, 
     Melvyn J. Kovacik, Edward R. Koziorowski, Warren J. Kutlik, 
     Francis J. Kwasny, Gordon D. Lauer, Cedric C. Lewis, Michael 
     Liacone, William J. Lopina, John A, Mamak, Archangel 
     Mastrangelo, Ernest R. McGee, James R. Mendenhall, Gerald E. 
     Mertes, Jr., Arthur A. Moeller, Leslie J. Montag, Michael G. 
     Moorehead, Raymond J. Morris, Darrell L. Morrison, Raymond D. 
     Muccianti, Thomas Muth, William Muth, Emery E. Myers, Larry 
     M. Narum, Harold Noftz, Arnold S. Oskin, John G. Pappas, 
     Terrance W. Parr, Michael L. Passman, Dennis M. Perz, Joseph 
     J. Pilch, Domenico Pinto, James T. Pioth, Warren Powell, 
     Richard J. Provost, Robert T. Przybylinski, David E. Quigley, 
     William J. Quinn, Jr., Peter A. Regnier, Scott R. Ripper, 
     John Rohlfing, Robert J. Rucinski, Edward A. Sarnecki, Thomas 
     L. Sbertoli, Michael R. Scott, Robert Shrutek, Leon E. Smith, 
     Robert S. Smith, Robert Spencer, John Z. Stajcic, Michael G. 
     Stalzer, Boykin L. Stewart, Jr., John S. Strama, Matthew J. 
     Strama, Robert Strickland, Howard Strickler, John J. 
     Tengelitsch, Anthony J. Thomas, Terrence J. Thompson, Sr., 
     William A. Trader, Frank C. Trout, Douglass M. Vines, Leonard 
     Vinyard, John A. Weiler, Paul Wiltjer, Robert M. Witt, Walter 
     Yanta, David Yost, John Zaragoza, Thomas Zasadil, and Raymond 
     F. Zipko.
on September 16, 2025, I regrettably 
missed a portion of the evening vote series. Had I been present, I 
would have voted YEA on Roll Call No. 270.
I rise to recognize and include in the 
Record, three prominent community members in the Nepali American 
community who have contributed to cultivating arts, culture, and 
business around the country.

  For more than twenty-five years, Navin KC has been a tireless force 
in the world of dance and choreography, introducing Nepali language, 
art, and culture to audiences both nationally and internationally. As 
the Founder and Director of KC Dance Center in Virginia, he has 
provided countless students, particularly second-generation children, 
with dance training that emphasizes not only technique but also 
cultural heritage and language. His choreography has been featured in 
films, theater productions, and music videos, while his students have 
performed across the United States in places such as Hollywood, New 
York, Texas, and Colorado. Since 2017, through his annual production, 
``Kollywood Night, Navin has created a powerful platform where 
emerging talent and celebrated artists come together to celebrate the 
richness of Nepali culture on stage.

  With more than two decades of dedication to art, culture, and 
language, Luna Shrestha has made a profound impact as a performer, 
choreographer, and instructor. As Co-Founder and Director of KC Dance 
Center, she has trained students across Virginia, Maryland, and 
Washington, D.C. in dance, yoga, aerobics, and Nepali-inspired fitness 
programs. Lunas work is driven by her passion for preserving and 
sharing Nepali traditions in America and giving young performers the 
opportunity to showcase their skills on stages nationwide. She plays a 
key role in the production of the annual ``Kollywood Night show for 
new trainees and established artists.

  A community leader, humanitarian, and advocate, Nabaraj KC has earned 
recognition on local and national levels. As President of the College 
Point Civic and Taxpayers Association and the Dil Kumari KC Memorial 
Foundation, he has led initiatives that raised more than $3 million 
worth of food, personal protective equipment, and other important 
resources to communities in need during the COVID-19 pandemic. His 
service has earned him several honors, including the REALTOR Spirit 
Award in 2022, Community Service Award in 2023, and COVID-19 Hero 
Award. He has also been named among Schneps Medias Queens Power List 
and Kings of New York. A proud New Yorker and son of Nepali immigrants, 
Nabaraj KC combines his professional and educational background with a 
dedication to community service.
I rise today to recognize and honor the 
Greater Hernando County Chamber of Commerce on the occasion of its 
100th anniversary--a remarkable milestone that reflects a century of 
steadfast service, economic leadership, and community commitment. 
Chambers of commerce are foundational institutIons within our 
communities. They promote economic vitality, advocate for local 
businesses, and offer critical resources such as training, marketing, 
and networking. The Greater Hernando County Chamber of Commerce 
embodies these principles and has served as a vital engine of 
prosperity for generations.
  The Chamber traces its origins to 1925, when local leaders first 
organized a community chamber under the guidance of Frederick 
Williamson, its inaugural president. Despite the challenges of the 
Great Depression, the Chamber persevered and experienced a revival in 
1938, led by visionary banker Alfred McKethan--a pivotal figure in 
Hernando Countys economic history. As the county grew rapidly in the 
latter half of the 20th century, particularly with the development of 
new communities like Spring Hill, the business landscape became 
increasingly diverse and fragmented. In a decisive moment of unity and 
forward-thinking, leaders Morris Porton, Steve Emerson, and Vince Vanni 
worked to consolidate the business community. Their efforts culminated 
in the formal establishment of the Greater Hernando County Chamber of 
Commerce on December 22, 1992.
  Over the past 100 years, the Chamber has evolved and expanded to meet 
the changing needs of Hernando Countys business community. Guided by 
its Pillars of Success--Advocacy, Marketing, Networking, and Training--
the Chamber has become the largest and oldest business organization in 
Hernando County. Its influence has been recognized across the region, 
including by the Tampa Bay Business Journal, which named it one of the 
largest chambers in the Tampa Bay area. The Chamber represents a broad 
and diverse membership spanning vital sectors such as professional 
services, construction and trades, real estate, healthcare, finance, 
education, retail, hospitality, transportation, manufacturing, and 
nonprofit organizations. It also leads impactful programs, including 
Leadership Hernando, a premier leadership development initiative that 
has graduated over 525 community leaders since its inception in 1992. 
The Chambers enduring commitment to economic development, 
collaboration, and community enrichment has played an essential role in 
shaping Hernando County into the thriving place it is today.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in congratulating the 
Greater Hernando County Chamber of Commerce on its centennial 
anniversary. May its legacy of service continue to strengthen our 
communities for generations to come.
I rise today to recognize Emma Weir for her 
outstanding service as Communications Director and Senior Advisor for 
the New Democrat Coalition over the past four years.
  As former chairwoman of the New Democrat Coalition, I had the 
privilege of working closely

with Emma. She brought strategic insight, professionalism, and a deep 
commitment to public service that strengthened our message, expanded 
our reach, and supported every member of the Coalition. During some of 
the most pivotal debates during the Democratic majority, Emmas 
creativity and instinct were instrumental in advancing New Dem 
priorities that helped improve the lives of Americans across the 
country. Her work has left a lasting impact on the New Dems and the 
values we fight for.
  While we will miss her leadership, I am excited to see Emma take on a 
new role with Chairman Pete Aguilar and the House Democratic Caucus. I 
know she will continue to serve with the same skill and dedication that 
made her so effective with the New Dems.
  I thank Emma for her service, and I wish her the very best in this 
next chapter.
Title IV of Senate Resolution 4, agreed to by the Senate of February 
4, 1977, calls for establishment of a system for a computerized 
schedule of all meetings and hearings of Senate committees, 
subcommittees, joint committees, and committees of conference. This 
title requires all such committees to notify the Office of the Senate 
Daily Digest--designated by the Rules Committee--of the time, place and 
purpose of the meetings, when scheduled and any cancellations or 
changes in the meetings as they occur.
  As an additional procedure along with the computerization of this 
information, the Office of the Senate Daily Digest will prepare this 
information for printing in the Extensions of Remarks section of the 
Congressional Record on Monday and Wednesday of each week.
  Meetings scheduled for Thursday, September 18, 2025 may be found in 
the Daily Digest of todays Record.
I rise today to welcome Ecumenical Patriarch 
Bartholomew, the Spiritual Head of the second largest Christian church 
in the world who is visiting our Nations Capital this week. Back home 
in Colorados 5th Congressional District, Archangel Michael Greek 
Orthodox Church is the home for many of my constituents of the Greek 
Orthodox faith. I welcome the Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew, wish 
him well during his time in America, and thank him for his leadership 
for the Orthodox Christian faith around the world, numbering 300 
million.
On September 17, 2025, on Page E870, in the third column, the 
following appeared: HON. ZACHARY NUNN OF IOWA IN THE HOUSE OF 
REPRESENTATIVES Wednesday, September 17, 2025 Mr. NUNN of Iowa. 
, I rise today
  
  The online version has been corrected to read: HON. NEAL P. DUNN 
OF FLORIDA IN THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES Wednesday, September 
17, 2025 Mr. DUNN of Florida. Mr. Speaker, I rise today

  to welcome his All-Holiness Ecumenical Patriarch Bartholomew to the 
 United States this week. My colleagues and I are honored to host him 
   here in the House of Representatives and I know my Greek-Orthodox 
 constituents are excited to have him visit our Nations Capital. His 
All-Holiness is a champion of religious liberty, engaging in dialogues 
with leaders of Judaism, Christianity, and Islam. Moreover, he leads a 
    congregation of 300 million church members worldwide and is the 
 longest-serving Patriarch in the two-millennia history of the Church. 
We are blessed to have him here in Washington, D.C. this week.