I rise in recognition of a milestone in our 
regions history. Toledo Public Schools celebrated 175 years of 
education today.
  As the school system notes, ``or 175 years, Toledo Public Schools has 
been one of the most influential institutions in the history of our 
city. The lives of hundreds of thousands of Toledoans have been formed 
within the walls of their neighborhood schools, leading to each ones 
mark on the future of our society. From its inception on May 8, 1849 to 
present day, TPS remains a progressive, forward-thinking school 
district.
  The first Toledo Public School Board was convened 175 years ago 
today. Only two years later, in 1851, Lagrange School was the first 
school to open. Two years after that, on August 15, 1853, the 
cornerstone was laid for the high school. When it opened in 1854 it 
also provided an education for girls, graduating the first young lady 
in the original Class of 1857. Leading social change again and again, 
Toledo Public Schools became integrated in 1871 and opened a school for 
children with disabilities in 1918.

  Toledo has long been at the forefront of the election of women to 
public office, starting with the election of Pauline Steinem to the 
board of education in 1904, the first woman elected any office in the 
city. Many years later, in 1990 Toledo Public Schools would once again 
prove itself a progressive agent for change with the appointment of Dr. 
Crystal Ellis, a longtime educator, as the first African-American 
Superintendent.
  In addition to academic excellence, vocational and college 
preparatory training, Toledo Public Schools students have won praise 
on the athletic field as well. From its beginnings, when Scott High 
School was declared the national football champs in 1916 and subsequent 
years, Toledo Public Schools have boasted many powerhouse athletic 
teams. At the same time, leading citizens in our community trace part 
of their success to the lessons learned in Toledo Public Schools.
  Reflecting the general population growth during the baby boom 
generation, Toledo Public Schools saw its highest numbers of both 
schools and students during the 1960s. Even now, it remains one of the 
areas largest employers and the fourth largest school district in the 
State of Ohio. Today, Toledo Public Schools is led by Dr. Romulus 
Durant, himself a product of Toledo Public Schools, who ably leads the 
school districts navigation in the 21st Century, declaring students, 
teachers, parents, administrators, and community to be ``TPS Proud.
  Toledo Public Schools is the core of our city. Graduates of years 
past, present and future are tied to one another with an invisible 
thread with memories and experience connecting them.
  In the Fall of 1967, the Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. visited 
the student at Scott High School, delivering inspiring oratory. Since 
its inception 175 years ago, Toledo Public Schools has delivered on the 
promise of words Dr. King once spoke when he explained, ``The function 
of education is to teach one to think intensively and to think 
critically. Intelligence plus character--that is the goal of true 
education. As Toledo Public Schools marches TPS Proud into the next 
years, that goal remains strong. Onward.
HONORING JUDGE DEAN A. COLVINS SERVICE TO MARSHALL COUNTY, INDIANA
I rise to congratulate my friend and fellow 
Hoosier Judge Dean Colvin of Marshall County Superior Court No. 2 as he 
prepares to retire this coming September after more than 37 years of 
serving on the bench.
  Born and raised in Marshall County, Judge Colvins distinguished 
career in public service

goes back 50 years to 1974. Starting out as a special deputy with the 
Marshall County Sheriffs Department, a Plymouth Police Officer, 
Investigator with the Marshall County Prosecutors Office, and Deputy 
Attorney General for the State of Indiana. Dean was appointed to serve 
the citizens of Marshall County as judge in 1986. In that time, Judge 
Colvin has dedicated himself to advancing the principles of justice and 
ensuring Hoosiers get a fair shake before the law.
  The Rule of Law tradition we have inherited helps secure individual 
liberty and promotes the conditions necessary for human flourishing. It 
is incumbent on us to do our part to make sure these principles of 
justice and Rule of Law precepts are passed seamlessly from one 
generation to the next. That mission is one Judge Colvin has embraced 
wholeheartedly and worked tirelessly to advance throughout his career.
  As Judge Colvins career comes to a close, I am reminded of the 
saying ``I like to see a man proud of the place in which he lives. I 
like to see a man live so that his place will be proud of him . I 
believe this quote applies uniquely well to Judge Colvin. The Plymouth 
community and all of Marshall County are unquestionably better off 
thanks to this good man with a servants heart. I am also very happy 
for him personally in that with his upcoming retirement, Dean will have 
more time to devote to his three great passions in life in addition to 
his family: baseball, cars, and cooking.
  I join Hoosiers throughout Indianas Second Congressional District in 
expressing our gratitude to Judge Dean Colvin for his service, and in 
wishing him a very happy retirement and all the best going forward. I 
thank Dean.
I rise today to honor Ms. Mia Norton for 
her invaluable work as a congressional intern serving in my D.C. 
office. I would like to take this opportunity to thank her for her hard 
work and recognize the meaningful contributions she has made to the 
office and serving the people of Western North Carolina this spring.
  Mia is from Clyde, North Carolina, located in NC-11. She will soon be 
concluding her sophomore year at American University, where she is 
studying journalism and political science.
  Interns work with congressional staff to serve constituents in my 
district. Mia was chosen from a competitive pool of applicants, and she 
exceeded every expectation.
  It was a pleasure to work with Mia, and I am proud to have such an 
intelligent and ambitious intern representing my office. Mia 
exemplified the spirit of public service and represents the best that 
Western North Carolina has to offer. Congratulations to Mia on the 
successful completion of her internship.
today, I rise to 
congratulate the Central Cabarrus boys high school basketball team on 
winning back-to-back 3A state championships. In recent years, the 
Central Cabarrus Vikings have been the dominant force to reckon with in 
North Carolina boys basketball. Local Charlotte news anchor Jim 
Tritsch described it perfectly when he said, ``there is no defense they 
cannot breach; there is no level of dominance they cant unlock.
  Led by Coach Jim Baker, the Vikings put up an astounding record of 
95-1 over the past three seasons. The Vikings most recent win not only 
earned them a second consecutive championship but raised Central 
Cabarrus winning streak to 65 straight games, the longest current 
winning streak in the country.
  Once again, on behalf of the 8th District of North Carolina, 
congratulations to Coach Baker and Viking Nation on this outstanding 
achievement.
I was unable to be present during Roll Call 
vote No. 186 on May 7, 2024. Had I been present, I would have voted 
YES.
I rise today to recognize Bruno Suacedo 
Martinez for earning the Arvada Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for 
Youth Award.
  Bruno has overcome many challenges along his journey to success, 
demonstrating perseverance at every step. Students who strive to make 
the most of their education, like Bruno, develop crucial skills and a 
work ethic that will guide them for the rest of their lives. This award 
is a testament to Brunos hard work, determination, and perseverance at 
Jefferson Jr./Sr. High School and is clearly just the beginning of a 
bright and promising future
  It is my honor to congratulate Bruno Suacedo Martinez on achieving 
the Arvada Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth Award.
I rise today to recognize Bryan Santillan 
for earning the Arvada Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth Award.
  Bryan has overcome many challenges along his journey to success, 
demonstrating perseverance at every step. Students who strive to make 
the most of their education, like Bryan, develop crucial skills and a 
work ethic that will guide them for the rest of their lives. This award 
is a testament to Bryans hard work, determination, and perseverance at 
Jefferson Jr./Sr. High School and is clearly just the beginning of a 
bright and promising future.
  It is my honor to congratulate Bryan Santillan on achieving the 
Arvada Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth Award.
I rise today to recognize the remarkable 
contributions of Mr. Efrain Casillas, the Coordinator of Music Programs 
for the Tolleson Elementary School District in Tolleson, Arizona. For 
the past 24 years, Mr. Casillas has dedicated himself to the education 
and enrichment of his students, serving as a public-school music 
teacher and imparting his passion for music to countless young minds. 
Mr. 
Casillas has beaten the odds and was named the Arizona Teacher of the 
Year in 2024 by the Arizona Educational Foundation, representing the 
state of Arizona at the national level among many more recognitions.
a profound impact on countless students, 
pioneering innovative music programs, including the districts first 
Mariachi, Jazz, Marching, Concert, and Latin Jazz bands. As a native of 
Puerto Rico, Mariachi was not part of his musical heritage, but 
Casillas made it a priority to learn it because it is part of the 
culture of many of his students who are native to Mexico.
  Under Mr. Casillas guidance, the Mariachi band has secured multiple 
awards, including the Tucson Mariachi International Conference Choice 
Awards for three consecutive years. Notably, his dedication led to the 
Mariachi band performing at the 2024 Annual White House Easter Egg Roll 
event and the marching band proudly participating in the Disneyland 
Parade. Additionally, Mr. Casillas directed the Tolleson Elementary 
School marching band in the Fiesta Bowl Parade for three consecutive 
years. Mr. Casillas commitment and talent have garnered numerous 
accolades and awards, including being named the Tolleson Elementary 
School District Teacher of the Year in 2015 and nominated for the Life 
Changer of the Year Award in 2017. He has also received the Esperanza 
Award from Chicanos Por La Causa and Arizonas Esperanza Latino Teacher 
Awards in 2018, along with the 2019 Music Teacher of Excellence 
Foundation Award by the Country Music Association. Furthermore, he was 
honored with the Music Teachers of Excellence from the Country Music 
Foundation Award (CMF) in 2020 and featured on the Kelly Clarkson Show.
2022. Mr. Casillas commitment to music education extends 
beyond the classroom, as he is an active member of many notable and 
impactful organizations. He has also served as a presenter for the 
National Symposium of Multicultural Music at the University of 
Tennessee in Knoxville in 2004 and as a clinician for the 2024 Tolleson 
High School Honors Mariachi Music Festival.
  The highest honor Mr. Casillas has received is having many of his 
former students return to assist in the music program as teachers or 
instructors. His impact is now extending to more students.
, I commend Mr. Efrain Casillas for his unwavering 
dedication to music education, his outstanding achievements as a 
teacher, and his tireless advocacy for public education. His passion, 
talent, and leadership have enriched the lives of countless students 
and inspired us all. I join my colleagues in expressing our deepest 
appreciation for Mr. Casillas contributions and in wishing him 
continued success in all his future endeavors.
I would like to recognize Ross Freeman for 
his historic contributions to the Scientific and Technological 
communities
  One of the UPs very own, Mr. Freeman grew up on a farm near 
Engadine. He graduated from Michigan State University in 1969 and 
received his masters degree from the University of Illinois in 1971.
(FPGA), a 
computer chip which revolutionized programming as we know it. The FPGA 
created what came to be known as ``open gates, which allowed 
engineers brand new reprogramming capabilities to adapt to changing 
standards and specifications and make last second changes to designs.
His incredible life was unfortunately cut short at the age of 41, not 
long after his vision for the future began taking shape. However, his 
contributions to society are immense and will be remembered by proud 
Yoopers all across our great state.
, I would like to recognize Ross Freeman for his 
contributions to both the Scientific Community and our Nation as a 
whole.
I rise today to recognize Susie Bell of 
Canon City for being inducted into the Fremont Hall of Fame.
  Susie was a pillar in Fremont County and spent decades improving the 
community before her passing in November of 2022. Her many 
philanthropic contributions and hours of volunteer work continue to 
have a transformative impact on students and so many others in Fremont 
County.
  Susie was committed to advancing education--she built several 
scholarships for current and future learners, supported early childhood 
development programs, and donated and volunteered for many events to 
promote the arts. Her tireless work and dedication to Fremont County 
did not go unnoticed. She will be missed, but her contributions will 
last for generations.
  On behalf of the people of Colorados Seventh Congressional District, 
it is my honor to congratulate Susie Bell for being inducted into 
Fremont Hall of Fame and thank her for her contribution and commitment 
to our community.
I rise today to recognize the one-hundred 
fortieth anniversary of the Doss School in Gillespie County, Texas. It 
is the longest continually running school in the State and is located 
northwest of Fredericksburg.
  Alumni, faculty, and students of the Doss School will gather to 
celebrate this milestone on May 18, 2024. Its motto is ``The small 
school with a big heart.
  School board president Cecil Crenwelge had this to say about the 
occasion, ``The history behind Doss School is truly remarkable. As we 
celebrate the incredible history of the school and its many alumni, we 
also have an eye to the future that is very bright.
  The original building for Doss School was officially designated a 
Texas Historic Landmark in 1985. The first classes at Doss School began 
in 1884. Mr. Tom Nixon donated land for the construction of a school 
building. Upon completion, students at Squaw Creek and Onion Creek 
schools merged with Doss and shared the new building. The school 
further expanded with a new building in 1927.
  I would like to thank the Friends of Doss School for preserving local 
history and this community treasure. I wish the students and faculty of 
Doss School well in the upcoming school year.
Title IV of Senate Resolution 4, agreed to by the Senate of February 
4, 1977, calls for establishment of a system for a computerized 
schedule of all meetings and hearings of Senate committees, 
subcommittees, joint committees, and committees of conference. This 
title requires all such committees to notify the Office of the Senate 
Daily Digest--designated by the Rules Committee--of the time, place and 
purpose of the meetings, when scheduled and any cancellations or 
changes in the meetings as they occur.
  As an additional procedure along with the computerization of this 
information, the Office of the Senate Daily Digest will prepare this 
information for printing in the Extensions of Remarks section of the 
Congressional Record on Monday and Wednesday of each week.
  Meetings scheduled for Thursday, May 9, 2024 may be found in the 
Daily Digest of todays Record.

                                 MAY 15
     10 a.m.
       Committee on Appropriations
       Subcommittee on Defense
         To hold hearings to examine select Department of Defense 
           acquisition programs.
                                                            SD-192

       Committee on Appropriations
       Subcommittee on Energy and Water Development
         To hold hearings to examine proposed budget estimates and 
           justification for fiscal year 2025 for the Army Corps 
           of Engineers and the Bureau of Reclamation.
                                                            SD-138
       Committee on Appropriations
       Subcommittee on Interior, Environment, and Related Agencies
         To hold hearings to examine proposed budget estimates and 
           justification for fiscal year 2025 for Indian Country.
                                                            SD-124
       Committee on the Budget
         To hold hearings to examine climate change and the costs 
           to national security.
                                                            SD-608
       Committee on Energy and Natural Resources
       Subcommittee on National Parks
         To hold hearings to examine the Presidents proposed 
           budget request for fiscal year 2025 for the National 
           Park Service, including S. 2620, to establish the 
           Chesapeake National Recreation Area as a unit of the 
           National Park System, S. 2742, to establish the Fort 
           Ontario National Monument in the State of New York as a 
           unit of the National Park System, S. 2743, to amend the 
           John D. Dingell, Jr. Conservation, Management, and 
           Recreation Act to designate as a component of the 
           National Heritage Area System the Finger Lakes National 
           Heritage Area in the State of New York, S. 2784, to 
           amend the Dayton Aviation Heritage Preservation Act of 
           1992 to adjust the boundary of the Dayton Aviation 
           Heritage National Historical Park, S. 3195, to 
           designate the General George C. Marshall House, in the 
           Commonwealth of Virginia, as an affiliated area of the 
           National Park System, S. 3241, to establish the Grand 
           Village of the Natchez Indians and Jefferson College as 
           affiliated areas of the Natchez Historical Park, S. 
           3251, to modify the boundary of the Lincoln Home 
           National Historic Site in the State of Illinois, S. 
           3474, to redesignate the Hulls Cove Visitor Center at 
           Acadia National Park as the ``George J. Mitchell, Jr., 
           Visitor Center, S. 3534, to authorize the Pines 
           Foundation to establish the Fire Island AIDS Memorial, 
           S. 3542, to amend the Atchafalaya National Heritage 
           Area Act to modify the boundary of the Atchafalaya 
           National Heritage Area, S. 3543, to establish the 
           Historic Greenwood District-Black Wall Street National 
           Monument in the State of Oklahoma, S. 3568/H.R. 3448, 
           to amend chapter 3081 of title 54, United States Code, 
           to enhance the protection and preservation of Americas 
           battlefields, S. 4129, to contribute funds and 
           artifacts to the Theodore Roosevelt Presidential 
           Library in Medora, North Dakota, S. 4209, to provide 
           greater regional access to the Katahdin Woods and 
           Waters National Monument in the State of Maine, S. 
           4216, to establish the Ocmulgee Mounds National Park 
           and Preserve in the State of Georgia, S. 4218, to 
           designate the visitor center for the First State 
           National Historical Park to be located at the Sheriffs 
           House in New Castle, Delaware, as the ``Thomas R. 
           Carper Visitor Center, S. 4222, to adjust the 
           boundary of the Mojave National Preserve in the State 
           of California to include the land within the Castle 
           Mountains National Monument, S. 4227, to amend the 
           California Desert Protection Act of 1994 to expand the 
           boundary of Joshua Tree National Park, S. 4228, to 
           redesignate the Cottonwood Visitor Center at Joshua 
           Tree National Park as the ``Senator Dianne Feinstein 
           Visitor Center, S. 4259, to require the Secretary of 
           the Interior to conduct a study to assess the 
           suitability and feasibility of designating certain land 
           as the Lahaina National Heritage Area, H.R. 359, to 
           establish Fort San Geronimo del Boqueron in Puerto Rico 
           as an affiliated area of the National Park System, and 
           H.R. 2717, to authorize the National Medal of Honor 
           Museum Foundation to establish a commemorative work on 
           the National Mall to honor the extraordinary acts of 
           valor, selfless service, and sacrifice displayed by 
           Medal of Honor recipients, and H.R. 4984, to amend the 
           District of Columbia Stadium Act of 1957 to provide for 
           the transfer of administrative jurisdiction over the 
           Robert F. Kennedy Memorial Stadium Campus to the 
           Administrator of General Services and the leasing of 
           the Campus to the District of Columbia for purposes 
           which include commercial and residential development.
                                                            SD-366
       Committee on Foreign Relations
         To hold hearings to examine the future of arms control 
           and deterrence.
                                                            SD-419
       Committee on Rules and Administration
         Business meeting to consider S. 2770, to prohibit the 
           distribution of materially deceptive AI-generated audio 
           or visual media relating to candidates for Federal 
           office, S. 3875, to amend the Federal Election Campaign 
           Act of 1971 to provide further transparency for the use 
           of content that is substantially generated by 
           artificial intelligence in political advertisements by 
           requiring such advertisements to include a statement 
           within the contents of the advertisements if generative 
           AI was used to generate any image, audio, or video 
           footage in the advertisements, and S. 3897, to require 
           the Election Assistance Commission to develop voluntary 
           guidelines for the administration of elections that 
           address the use and risks of artificial intelligence 
           technologies.
                                                            SR-301
     10:30 a.m.
       Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
         Business meeting to consider S. 4066, to improve Federal 
           technology procurement, S. 3015, to amend title 5, 
           United States Code, to address telework for Federal 
           employees, S. 4043, to amend title 5, United States 
           Code, to make executive agency telework policies 
           transparent, to track executive agency use of telework, 
           S. 3810, to prohibit conflict of interests among 
           consulting firms that simultaneously contract with the 
           Government of the Peoples Republic of China and the 
           United States Government, S. 2492, to amend title II of 
           the Social Security Act to improve coordination between 
           the Do Not Pay working system and Federal and State 
           agencies authorized to use the system, S. 4181, to 
           require the development of a workforce plan for the 
           Federal Emergency Management Agency, S. 4035, to 
           require the Director of the Office of Personnel 
           Management to take certain actions with respect to the 
           health insurance program carried out under chapter 89 
           of title 5, United States Code, H.R. 6249, to provide 
           for a review and report on the assistance and resources 
           that the Administrator of the Federal Emergency 
           Management Agency provides to individuals with 
           disabilities and the families of such individuals that 
           are impacted by major disasters, H.R. 5528, to require 
           the Director of the Office of Management and Budget 
           conduct a review to determine the impact of the lowest 
           price technically acceptable source selection process 
           on national security, an original bill entitled, ``DHS 
           Better Ballistic Body Armor Act, and an original bill 
           entitled, ``Cross Border Aerial Law Enforcement 
           Operations Act.
                                                            SD-342
     2 p.m.
       Committee on Appropriations
       Subcommittee on State, Foreign Operations, and Related 
           Programs
         To hold hearings to examine strengthening American 
           competitiveness, focusing on the roles of the U.S. 
           International Development Finance Corporation, Export-
           Import Bank, and Millennium Challenge Corporation.
                                                            SD-138
     2:30 p.m.
       Committee on Appropriations
       Subcommittee on Commerce, Justice, Science, and Related 
           Agencies
         To hold hearings to examine proposed budget estimates and 
           justification for fiscal year 2025 for the Department 
           of Commerce.
                                                            SD-192
       Committee on Appropriations
       Subcommittee on Legislative Branch
         To hold hearings to examine proposed budget estimates and 
           justification for fiscal year 2025 for the Library of 
           Congress and the Architect of the Capitol.
                                                            SD-124
     2:45 p.m.
       Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
       Subcommittee on Emerging Threats and Spending Oversight
         To hold hearings to examine the findings and 
           recommendations of GAOs 2024 Report on Opportunities 
           to Reduce Fragmentation, Overlap, and Duplication and 
           Achieve Financial Benefits.
                                                            SD-342
     3:30 p.m.
       Committee on Veterans Affairs
         To hold hearings to examine frontier health care, 
           focusing on ensuring veterans access no matter where 
           they live.
                                                            SR-418
     4 p.m.
       Committee on Armed Services
       Subcommittee on Airland
         To hold hearings to examine Army modernization in review 
           of the Defense Authorization Request for Fiscal Year 
           2025 and the Future Years Defense Program.
                                                           SR-232A

                                 MAY 16
     9:30 a.m.
       Committee on Armed Services
         To hold hearings to examine the posture of the Department 
           of the Navy in review of the Defense Authorization 
           Request for Fiscal Year 2025 and the Future Years 
           Defense Program; to be immediately followed by a closed 
           session in SVC-217.
                                                            SH-216

     10 a.m.
       Committee on Energy and Natural Resources
         To hold hearings to examine the Presidents proposed 
           budget request for fiscal year 2025 for the Forest 
           Service.
                                                            SD-366
     10:30 a.m.
       Committee on Foreign Relations
         To hold hearings to examine Department of State 
           modernization and management, focusing on building a 
           Department to address 21st century challenges.
                                                            SD-419

                                 MAY 21
     2:30 p.m.
       Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions
       Subcommittee on Primary Health and Retirement Security
         To hold hearings to examine feeding a healthier America, 
           focusing on current efforts and potential opportunities 
           for Food is Medicine.
                                                            SD-430

                                JUNE 12
     10 a.m.
       Committee on Environment and Public Works
         To hold hearings to examine the Presidents proposed 
           budget request for fiscal year 2025 for the Fish and 
           Wildlife Service.
                                                            SD-406
I rise today to extend my congratulations to 
Dr. Matthew B. Rettig, Medical Director of the Prostate Cancer Program 
at the David Geffen School of Medicine at the University of California, 
Los Angeles and Chief of Hematology-Oncology at the Veterans Affairs 
Medical Center in Greater Los Angeles, on receiving the Department of 
Veterans Affairs Office of Clinical Science Research and Development 
John B. Barnwell Award in recognition of his significant contributions 
to the field of prostate cancer diagnosis and treatment.
  Dr. Rettig began his Veterans Affairs (VA) career as a staff 
physician in the Division of Hematology-Oncology at the VA Greater Los 
Angeles Health Care System in 1996. He became a leader within the 
department, and his unwavering commitment to improving health outcomes 
for veterans diagnosed with prostate cancer led to the development of 
the VA Precision Oncology Program Cancer of the Prostate (POPCaP) 
network. Dr. Rettig is credited for fostering the partnership between 
the VA and Prostate Cancer Foundation (PCF), which has resulted in the 
PCF committing $50M to support this program and expanding services to 
over 20 centers across the nation to meet the critical care needs of 
American veterans with prostate cancer.
  Along with his leadership of the Prostate Cancer Program, Dr. Rettig 
is also a Professor of Medicine and Urology at UCLA where he is 
training the next generation of clinicians and researchers. Dr. Rettig 
has dedicated himself to the future of the field, having generously 
mentored and trained over 31 residents, fellows, post-doctoral 
scholars, and junior faculty in veteran-centered clinical research, a 
majority of whom continue to serve the VA to meet the healthcare needs 
of veterans while also conducting their own independent cutting-edge 
research in various disciplines. The impact of his work is far-reaching 
and truly immeasurable.
  Dr. Rettig is ranked among the top ten clinical investigators 
nationally both within and outside of the VA and is a major asset for 
the VA and the veterans they serve. His expertise and achievements in 
genitourinary oncology and research are evidenced by invitations to 
serve on local and national committees and boards including the VA 
National GU Cancer Working Group Steering Committee, Brentwood 
Biomedical Research Institute, Greater LA Research &amp; Education 
Foundation, Department of Defense, and the Prostate Cancer Foundation, 
among many others. Additionally, he serves on an editorial capacity for 
13 scientific and medical journals.
  It is with great honor that I congratulate Dr. Rettig upon receiving 
the Barnwell Award, the highest honor conferred by the VA Clinical 
Science Research and Development Service, in recognition of outstanding 
scientific achievements in clinical research. I ask that all Members 
join me in congratulating Dr. Rettig on his award and his service to 
our Nations veterans.