Pro Tempore, I rise today in recognition of 
the Chester Historical Societys annual scarecrow celebration in 
Chester, New Hampshire. Each year, as the weather cools and the leaves 
fall, hundreds of new faces appear in the town of Chester as residents 
decorate scarecrows in support of the Chester Historical Society. These 
stylized scarecrows represent everything from pop culture icons to 
historical figures and local heroes, but together they tell the story 
of a small town celebrating community and a beloved tradition.
  From scarecrows depicting Paul Revere on horseback to a Star Trek-
inspired Taylor Swift, each scarecrow is a unique expression of the 
creativity of Chester residents. For 14 years, this celebration has 
served as an opportunity for residents to showcase their artistic 
skills with money raised from the sale of scarecrow kits supporting the 
efforts by the Historical Society to promote the history of the town 
and continuous education about local culture. Along Routes 102 and 121, 
hundreds of scarecrows line the street demonstrating that the Chester 
Historical Society succeeds in spreading history and happiness across 
town.
  On behalf of my constituents in New Hampshires First Congressional 
District, I want to congratulate the Chester Historical Society for 
preserving this cherished tradition and to commend them on the work 
they have done to educate town residents on local culture. I look 
forward to a continued partnership with the town of Chester, and I 
cannot wait to see the creativity displayed in this years crop of 
scarecrows.
Pro Tempore, I rise today in 
commemoration of the David and Pat Hartline Day.
  David is a retired LTC, U.S. Army, best-selling author and past State 
Commander of the American Legion. David has invested over 50 years of 
his life assisting veterans and their families with the problems they 
face. He has been nominated for the Presidential Medal of Freedom for 
his service to this country, its veterans and youth programs. He been 
named veteran of the year by the Governor of Alabama and was proclaimed 
a super citizen by TBS television station.
  Pat is a retired registered nurse with over 50 years of service. She 
is actively involved with the American Legion Auxiliary. Pat served 
with the American Heart Association for a number of years, where she 
taught principles of heart disease as well as CPR to professionals, 
students, and communities.
  David and Pat have raised four children, ten grandchildren and 
fourteen great-grandchildren. They currently reside on the farm that 
has been in the family since 1840.
  The towns of Centre, Cedar Bluff, Leesburg, Gaylesville, and Sand 
Rock declared Saturday, October 7, 2023 as David and Pat Hartline Day.
, please join me in commemorating David and 
Pat Hairline Day. I thank them for their service to our Nation, our 
communities, and our veterans.
Pro Tempore, I rise today to 
recognize a loving husband, iconic coach, dedicated community servant 
and dear friend of longstanding, Coach Hampton ``Hamp Smith. Sadly, 
Coach Smith passed away on Monday, October 2, 2023. A homegoing service 
to celebrate his remarkable life was held on Saturday, October 7, 2023, 
at the Mount Pilgrim Missionary Baptist Church in Albany, Georgia.
  The genesis of the life of Coach Hampton Smith began on October 1, 
1934, in Greenwood, Mississippi where he was born to the union of the 
late Richard Smith and Fannie Hampton Smith. A product of the Leflore 
County, Mississippi school system, he graduated from Threadgill High 
School and went on to earn a Bachelors degree from Mississippi Valley 
Vocational College (Now Mississippi Valley State University) in 1957. 
From 1957 to 1959, Coach served honorably in the United States Army.
  Coach Smith began his legendary coaching career in 1959 as an 
assistant coach at Mississippi Valley Vocational College. He then 
coached at McComb High School and J.E. Johnson High School before 
serving as assistant football coach at Tennessee Agricultural and 
Industrial College during 1969 and 1970 while earning his Masters 
degree. Coach Smith then began the first of two legendary stints at 
Albany State College in 1971 through 1976, went back to Mississippi 
Valley for 1977 to 1978, only to return to Albany State as an assistant 
coach from 1980 to 1981. He then became head coach for the Albany State 
Golden Rams from 1982 to 1999. Multi-talented and multi-faceted, Coach 
Smith also

served as Albany State baseball coach from 1981 to 1983, compiling a 
record of 46-37-1.
  Overall, during his career in coaching, he compiled an impressive 
record of 157-90-4; he made 5 NCAA D-II Playoff appearances and led 
Albany State to 9 SIAC Championships. He was inducted in the Albany 
State University Athletic Hall of Fame in 2004 and the SIAC Hall of 
Fame in 2014.
  Coach Smiths impact was felt well beyond the athletic field. He was 
more than just a coach. He helped shape the character of generations of 
young men and women at Albany State and helped shape the character of 
his community through his active civic engagement in local, state and 
national politics. He strongly encouraged people to exercise their duty 
to vote in every election.
  Coach Smith accomplished much in his life but none of it would have 
been possible without the grace of God and love and support of his late 
wife, Charlene Johnson Smith. This union lasted for 60 years until 
Charlenes passing in April of 2022.
  On a personal note, Coach Smith was my friend and supporter for 30 
years. For his loyalty, support and wise counsel, I will be forever 
grateful.
  Coach Hamp Smith was a Hall of Fame Coach and a Hall of Fame human 
being. To God be the Glory for his extraordinary life and legacy.
, I ask my colleagues to join my wife, Vivian 
and me, along with the more than 765,000 people of Georgias Second 
Congressional District in paying tribute to Coach Hampton Smith and in 
extending our deepest sympathies to his family, friends, and all who 
mourn his loss. Moreover, we pray that we will all be consoled and 
comforted by an abiding faith and the Holy Spirit in the days, weeks, 
and months ahead.
Pro Tempore, I rise today to recognize the 
contributions of Colonel Elizabeth Aptekar as she is honored as one of 
Californias 8th Congressional Districts Women of the Year.
  Elizabeth serves as the Commander of the 60th Mission Support Group 
at the 60th Air Mobility Wing at Travis Air Force Base. She leads a 
1,900-member group that provides support to three wings and more than 
fifty mission partners. Her team rapidly mobilized support for 104 
nations, readied 3,000 missions, and executed 2,000 deployments and 
seven Presidential Support packages which empowered six Combatant 
Commands to enable diplomatic and economic ties globally. Locally, she 
oversaw 54 construction projects totaling $137 million which 
facilitated the KC-46 aircraft activation at Travis Air Force Base. She 
also guided a $208 million Defense Health Agency contracting transition 
strategy for the Air Forces largest hospital, saving $48 million and 
harnessing $15 million for other critical priorities. She also 
leveraged Defense and hybrid energy initiatives positioning $20 million 
toward alternative energy, fuel resources, and electric vehicle 
infrastructure. Elizabeth has also worked to integrate Travis AFB with 
the surrounding community, organizing meetings between base and city 
leaders and fostering support for initiatives focused on infrastructure 
and quality of life improvements. Demonstrating her commitment to 
Airmen, her teams 90 percent execution rate of resiliency funds was 
No. 1 in the Air Force, ensuring Team Travis Airmen and Families across 
77 units were immersed in surrounding community activities. Elizabeths 
work has improved quality of life for all members of the Travis AFB 
community, and her engaged leadership, service to others, and 
commitment to excellence is noted and celebrated.
  On behalf of the people of Californias 8th Congressional District, 
it is my pleasure to honor and recognize Elizabeth Aptekar for her 
positive contributions to our community.
Pro Tempore, I rise today to recognize the 
contributions of Elizabeth Hoffman as she is honored as one of 
Californias 8th Congressional Districts Women of the Year.
  Elizabeth is the Executive Director of Rebuilding Together Solano 
County, an organization that provides home rehabilitation services and 
hosts community volunteer workdays. Her tireless work has improved the 
quality of life for low-income families, veterans, and disabled 
individuals in our district. She coordinates thousands of volunteers 
who help build low-income housing and community centers. This year, she 
has led home improvement efforts to help low-income communities and 
veterans widows. She helped distribute over 2,000 Disaster Safe at 
Home Kits to low-income veterans, seniors, and disabled households. 
Elizabeth partnered with local government and community volunteers to 
install smoke and carbon monoxide detectors, assemble raised garden 
beds, and distribute more than 950,000 pounds of food. Her dedication 
to helping low-income individuals, veterans, seniors, and disabled 
residents throughout Solano County is unparalleled.
  On behalf of the people of Californias 8th Congressional District, 
it is my pleasure to honor and recognize Elizabeth Hoffman for her 
positive contributions to our community.
Pro Tempore, I rise today to recognize the 
contributions of Jameelah Hanif as she is honored as one of 
Californias 8th Congressional Districts Women of the Year.
  Jameelah is a community organizer, family advocate, and champion for 
children. She is the Founder, CEO, and Executive Director of Watch Me 
Grow, Inc, a non-profit organization that provides resources and 
training for parents. Jameelah facilitates the Parent Leadership 
Training Institute to help parents advocate for their children and 
families. She has been a small business owner for 10 years, providing 
quality childcare and family services to over 150 children. Jameelah 
has also been the Chair of the Solano County Local Child Care Planning 
Council and the Solano County Licensed Family Child Care Association. 
She has a degree in Child Development and Family Services, and 
completed the Solano County Parent Leadership Training Institute, 
Leadership Vallejo, and EmergeCA programs. Since the beginning of 2022, 
-led community clean-ups to expose 
our youth to community service and to develop community pride, 
attracting over 350 participants. Ms. Hanif is currently the Vallejo 
leader of All Children Thrive California initiative, a community-led 
movement working towards creating protective community environments 
that allow all children to thrive. Jameelah has been a strong voice for 
children and families in Vallejo and with her passion for this work she 
will continue to expand her advocacy locally and regionally.
  On behalf of the people of Californias 8th Congressional District, 
it is my pleasure to honor and recognize Jameelah Hanif for her 
positive contributions to our community.
Pro Tempore, I rise today to recognize the 
contributions of Janet Scoll Johnson as she is honored as one of 
Californias 8th Congressional Districts Women of the Year.
  Janet is an active and determined community advocate for 
environmental justice. She has served in many roles as part of her 
advocacy and community service. She has served for nine years as the 
co-coordinator of the Sunflower Alliance, which works to protect the 
health and safety of all Bay Area communities affected by toxic 
pollution and climate change. Janet also served for four years as the 
co-chair of the Richmond ShorelineAlliance. She has advocated for a 
full cleanup of toxic sites, for the preservation of Point Molate, and 
for public awareness of the dangers of sea level rise. Janet was a 
member of the Richmond-San Pablo AB-617 Community Air Monitoring 
Steering Committee and a lead organizer for No Coal in Richmond, a 
grassroots organization that works to prevent coal and petroleum coke 
from being shipped through the Levin-Richmond Terminal in an effort to 
prevent toxic dust from contaminating local air, water, and soil in 
nearby neighborhoods. Thanks to Janets successful advocacy, a land-use 
ordinance to phase out a coal and petroleum coke handling and storage 
at a private terminal in the Port of Richmond was passed.
  On behalf of the people of Californias 8th Congressional District, 
it is my pleasure to honor and recognize Janet Scoll Johnson for her 
positive contributions to our community.
Pro Tempore, it is with a heavy heart I 
rise today to honor the life of Mr. Aiden Ortiz, who was tragically 
struck and killed by a vehicle at age twelve on September 25, 2023. His 
family, friends, and community are devastated by this sudden loss. A 
sixth grader at Melva Davis Academy of Excellence. Aiden Ortiz was 
known as a selfless, caring son and friend to all who had the privilege 
of knowing him.
  As a father of two myself, it is nearly impossible to imagine losing 
ones child. I treasure every moment with my sons, and losing a child 
so suddenly is every parents greatest fear.
  Aiden was caring and always put others ahead of himself. According to 
his baseball coach, Rodney McNealy, Aiden has been a part of the league 
since Tee-ball and made a name for himself in the Majors Division of 
the Adelanto Little League, where he played for the Rockies last 
spring. Aiden was a true sportsman whose passion for baseball and life 
was contagious.
  While Aidens life was tragically cut short, he made a tremendous 
impact on every life he touched. Aiden is survived by his mother 
Allyssa, his stepfather, Alex, and his two siblings. He will be deeply 
missed by all who knew him. My thoughts and prayers are with Aidens 
family as they navigate this difficult loss.
  I ask my colleagues to join me in mourning Aidens passing and 
celebrating his life.
Pro Tempore, I rise today to recognize 
Aisha Ozaslan of Golden, Colorado for receiving the United States 
Department of State Benjamin A. Gilman International Scholarship. As 
part of this prestigious honor, Aisha traveled to South Korea to study 
abroad.
  U.S. Study Abroad programs are an important component of the federal 
governments efforts to ensure Americans of all backgrounds have the 
opportunity to gain global experiences and work across our borders to 
help address our worlds greatest challenges. The Benjamin A. Gilman 
Scholarship provides exceptional undergraduate students with the 
opportunity to expand their cultural proficiencies, study critical need 
languages, and conduct STEM research. The scholarship has empowered 
over 41,000 individuals with financial need to engage in people-to-
people diplomacy and prepare for distinguished careers in public 
service.
  I commend Aisha for pursuing an exemplary international education and 
representing America abroad as a citizen ambassador. This scholarship 
rightly recognizes a commitment to academic excellence. Mr. Speaker Pro 
Tempore, it is a privilege to recognize Aishas many accomplishments.
Pro Tempore, I would like to take a moment to 
commemorate the 100th anniversary of Brown &amp; Haleys invention of their 
flagship candy, Almond Roca, on October 10, 2023.
  My district is home to vibrant towns and thriving small businesses--
but none so sweet as Brown &amp; Haley, a confectionary company founded by 
two friends, Harry Brown and JC Haley, in 1912 in the City of Tacoma, 
Washington.
  In 1923, they invented their signature candy: the Almond Roca, an 
iconic, log-shaped crunchy toffee covered in chocolate and crushed 
almonds. Almond Roca traveled with our troops in World War II, was 
carried by Sir Edmund Hilary during his Everest expeditions, and today 
is sold in over 60 countries.
  One hundred years later, Brown &amp; Haley produces Almond Roca using the 
same recipe, the same ingredients, and even in the same plant in 
Tacoma--a converted shoe factory purchased in 1919. Brown &amp; Haley 
remains a family business with over 200 employees and today produces 
over three million pieces of Almond Roca.
, I am thrilled to acknowledge Brown &amp; Haleys 
enduring legacy in Tacoma and the 100 years of joy that

Almond Roca has brought not just to our neck of the woods, but across 
the world.
Pro Tempore, I rise today to recognize 
Aubrey Miller of Arvada, Colorado for receiving the United States 
Department of State Benjamin A. Gilman International Scholarship. As 
part of this prestigious honor, Aubrey traveled to South Korea to study 
abroad.
  U.S. Study Abroad programs are an important component of the federal 
governments efforts to ensure Americans of all backgrounds have the 
opportunity to gain global experiences and work across our borders to 
help address our worlds greatest challenges. The Benjamin A. Gilman 
Scholarship provides exceptional undergraduate students with the 
opportunity to expand their cultural proficiencies, study critical need 
languages, and conduct STEM research. The scholarship has empowered 
over 41,000 individuals with financial need to engage in people-to-
people diplomacy and prepare for distinguished careers in public 
service.
  I commend Aubrey for pursuing an exemplary international education 
and representing America abroad as a citizen ambassador. This 
scholarship rightly recognizes a commitment to academic excellence. Mr. 
Speaker Pro Tempore, it is a privilege to recognize Aubreys many 
accomplishments.
Pro Tempore, I rise today to recognize 
Audrey Buller of Arvada, Colorado for receiving the United States 
Department of State Benjamin A. Gilman International Scholarship. As 
part of this prestigious honor, Audrey traveled to Zambia to study 
abroad.
  U.S. Study Abroad programs are an important component of the federal 
governments efforts to ensure Americans of all backgrounds have the 
opportunity to gain global experiences and work across our borders to 
help address our worlds greatest challenges. The Benjamin A. Gilman 
Scholarship provides exceptional undergraduate students with the 
opportunity to expand their cultural proficiencies, study critical need 
languages, and conduct STEM research. The scholarship has empowered 
over 41,000 individuals with financial need to engage in people-to-
people diplomacy and prepare for distinguished careers in public 
service.
  I commend Audrey for pursuing an exemplary international education 
and representing America abroad as a citizen ambassador. This 
scholarship rightly recognizes a commitment to academic excellence. Mr. 
Speaker Pro Tempore, it is a privilege to recognize Audreys many 
accomplishments.
Pro Tempore, I rise today to 
recognize Tiffany Lynn Caver-Pugh, a loving mother and grandmother who 
passed away in her horne on August 25, 2023. Tiffany was a character of 
devotion to kindness and spirituality.
  Born in Buffalo on March 11, 1978. Tiffany called herself a Buffalo 
native. As the youngest of four siblings. Tiffanys firm belief in 
doing what was right was exemplified in frequent spirited debates with 
her siblings. Her devotion to the Church placed morals at the forefront 
of her person. Baptized at a young age at the first Shiloh Missionary 
Baptist Church, Tiffany, along with her mother and siblings, later 
became founding members of Free Spirit Missionary Baptist Church under 
Reverend Boyd and Careathers. An active member of the Free Spirit 
Missionary Baptist Church until her passing, Tiffany exemplified a 
lifelong commitment to church service.
  Tiffany, through her determined and wise personality, held herself 
and others to high moral standards. As her favorite saying was ``What 
would Jesus do, she found herself working for Aspire of Western New 
York and People Incorporated, two non-profit organizations dedicated to 
helping those with developmental disabilities lead lives integrated in 
the general community. Tiffany joined Aspire in 2006 during a time of 
expansion, with the organization seeking to represent her own lifes 
goals: to care for those who need it. As a Buffalo native, she cared 
for her community through her work in the social work field. She passed 
shortly after her advance to management in 2021.
  Tiffany is survived by a large family. including her new 
granddaughter whom she affectionately called ``P, ``CinnaBun, and 
``Honey Bun. I invite all present to join me in recognizing Tiffany, 
who was devoted as ever to family, morality, and care until the end.
Pro Tempore, the people of Turkiye and 
Turkish Americans celebrate Turkish Republic Day every year on October 
29th. This important date commemorates when Turkiye in 1923 became a 
republic thanks to the leadership of Mustafa Kemal Ataturk. This 
October 29th is a special celebration because it marks 100th 
Anniversary of the Republic of Turkiye.
  While Anatolia, the home of the Republic of Turkiye, has been a 
cradle of civilizations for millennia, Turkiye has transformed from its 
ancient history to the modern skylines of Ankara. The progress the 
Turkish people have made over the past century is a testament to their 
resilience, determination, and spirit.
  The Republic of Turkiye has historically been a strong and reliable 
ally of the United States thanks to its founding principles of 
democracy, secularism, and equality. Turkiye boasts the second largest 
military in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and is allied 
with the United States on key issues of counterterrorism, energy 
diversification, securing the global supply chains, and drug and human 
trafficking prevention.
  I am proud to recognize the rich tapestry of Turkish-American 
contributions to the United States. Turkish-Americans have made 
important strides in several fields, including academia, business, 
medicine, arts, and culture. Turkish-Americans have enriched our 
society with their traditions, cuisine, and heritage. These 
contributions are especially ever present in New Jerseys Ninth 
Congressional district, with the largest Turkish immigrant community in 
the United States centered around the thriving Little Istanbul in South 
Paterson.
  The Turkish-American community is an important bridge to strengthen 
the understanding and friendship between our two nations. As I reflect 
on Turkiyes 100th Republic Day, I hope everyone will celebrate the 
shared values and interests that bind our nations. I congratulate, 
Turkiye, on their centenary, and I thank them, Turkish-Americans, for 
their enduring contributions to the United States.