today I honor a Lansing, Michigan-based 
institution that for 30 years has been dedicated to revitalizing 
communities across our great state and around the country. Guided by 
the belief that every community needs affordable housing, job 
opportunities, high-quality healthcare, and childcare, Cinnaire has, 
since 1993, strategically invested in economically and racially 
marginalized communities that have historically been denied access to 
Capital. As this vibrant non-profit organization celebrates its 30th 
anniversary, I applaud Cinnaire for the systemic change it is helping 
to bring about.
  Armed with a dream and vision to change lives and transform 
struggling neighborhoods, Cinnaires founder and CEO Mark McDaniel sat 
down in 1993 at a table with a phone and a Rolodex of names and contact 
information. From those humble beginnings, he launched a new tax credit 
fund in Michigan, which over the past 3 decades has become a nearly $6 
billion investment.
  As a community development financial organization, Mark and his team, 
which has now grown to 130 dedicated employees, have found creative 
ways to leverage existing financial resources from public and private 
sector organizations to provide access to investment funding, lending 
options, and other services that support economic development in the 
communities they serve. The result has been profound: since 1993, 
Cinnaire has supported more than 1,000 housing developments, provided 
more than 63,000 affordable apartments, and created or retained more 
than 92,000 jobs.
  I have seen firsthand the transformative work Cinnaire is doing in 
Lansing, and I am so thankful for its commitment to systemic change and 
problem-solving. I salute Cinnaire for a 30-year commitment to ensuring 
everyone, especially the most vulnerable among us, can lead lives of 
dignity and opportunity. May the good work of this organization 
continue long into the future.
I rise today to commemorate two 
anniversary celebrations. This month, District Energy of Saint Paul 
will mark its 40th anniversary, and its subsidiary Ever-Green Energy, 
will mark its 25th year of providing heating and cooling to downtown 
Saint Paul and the nearby West Side neighborhood. For years, these 
organizations have demonstrated a path to sustainable energy deployment 
by heating and cooling hundreds of buildings, from homes to hotels, 
offices to sports venues, and more. Their deep knowledge of energy 
system management has allowed them to promote energy conservation and 
dependable heating and cooling services to their customers and--just as 
important--a path forward on a climate-resilient future.
  Founded in 1983 as a public-private partnership, the nonprofit 
District Energy works with the City of Saint Paul, the Saint Paul Port 
Authority, and local business leaders to benefit our community. 
District Energy manages the largest hot water district system in North 
America, featuring biomass-fired cogeneration, thermal storage, and 
solar thermal technology, sending hot water and chilled water 
throughout their network of over 200 buildings, including commercial, 
light industrial, and residential areas. This approach, which is rare 
in the United States, was championed by Saint Paul Mayor George 
Latimer, as a cleaner and more price-stable alternative to natural gas 
during the 1970s oil crisis.
  In addition to excellent service, District Energy provides great 
value and exemplary energy efficiency. In 2011, District Energy 
launched the largest solar hot water installation in the country, and 
in 2019, they ended their use of coal. By 2050, they plan to achieve 
carbon neutrality by reducing their greenhouse gas emissions by 7 
percent annually. Even the United Nations has taken note, recognizing 
District Energy as 1 of just 3 American systems achieving global 
standards for best practices. Now, District Energy customers pay less 
for energy today than they did 40 years ago.
  Ever-Green Energy was founded in 1998, as a for-profit subsidiary of 
the nonprofit District Energy. Ever-Green Energy brings District 
Energys expertise to not only the management of their operations but 
also allows other communities to employ their expertise by hiring them 
as consultants for new renewable energy projects. Ever-Green Energy 
manages 10 utility systems, assists communities in developing plans to 
meet their climate and carbon reduction goals, helps optimize energy 
systems, and more. In addition to being good for the planet this 
strategy is good for the residents of Saint Paul who enjoy low rates 
offset by the consulting revenue that subsidizes Ever-Green Energys 
local operations.
  Throughout their years of operation, District Energy and Ever-Green 
Energy have demonstrated a spirit of innovation and relentless progress 
combined with true expertise and sound management. Their operations 
have won praise from all over the world as well as the appreciation of 
our entire Saint Paul community.
, please join me in celebrating the anniversary of 2 
organizations that not only provide heating and cooling for so many in 
Saint Paul but also help the rest of the world to become a little 
greener.
today I recognize the legacy of service and 
leadership of Michael Pollack, a resident of Arizonas 5th 
Congressional District, and I join him in celebrating his 50th year of 
business as the President and Founder of Pollack Investments.
  Pollack Investments specializes in commercial restoration and 
renovation projects, specifically long-term investments in shopping 
centers and other multi-tenant locations. In his industry, many 
developers will look at a property that has fallen into disrepair and 
only see a building ripe for demolition. But, in his own words, Michael 
sees ``each real estate project as an opportunity to enhance the fabric 
of Arizonas cities, one development at a time.
  Thats not just a catchy line. After renewing these properties to 
their full potential, Michael insists that they are held for many 
years--even multiple decades--to ensure the long-term success of their 
surrounding neighborhoods. Michaels foresight and unique understanding 
of market trends have allowed him to transform Pollack Investments into 
a major driver of economic development across the Phoenix metro area, 
and what began with Michael building a single home in 1973 has grown 
into a staggering portfolio, with commercial real estate assets 
totaling in the tens-of-millions of square feet.
  Michaels expertise has allowed for success where others have fallen 
short, remaining profitable even in the most difficult of economic 
times. And its in these times that Michaels character has shown 
through. Whether refusing to take advantage of those affected by the 
housing crash and economic downturn or working with tenants to make it 
through the uncertainty of the COVID era without closing their doors, 
Michael has always remained focused on protecting the overall economic 
and social health of our cities and their residents. In this mission, 
Im certain of his continued success.
  More importantly, however, Michaels legacy extends far past his 
business. His same passion for revitalization has allowed entire 
communities to start fresh by bringing in new development and jobs has 
also given hope to individuals and organizations through his 
philanthropy and deep community involvement. One

indicator of a mans heart and his generosity is consistency--and 
Michael is widely recognized as one of Arizonas most generous business 
leaders both in times of plenty and times of hardship. I thank Michael 
for his tremendous example.
  Michaels enduring legacy is one of inspiration, renewal, and 
compassion. He has set new standards in his industry and his community, 
and he has made an immeasurable impact on the lives of countless 
Arizonans who work, shop, and live in the communities he has worked 
hard to reinvigorate. On behalf of Arizonas 5th Congressional 
District, I thank Michael for inspiring others by his unwavering 
commitment to making our communities better than he found them--one 
development at a time.
I rise today to posthumously honor the 
late Corporal Danny K. Allen for his valiant military service during 
the Vietnam War Era. Drafted in 1970, Corporal Allen proudly served in 
the United States Army for 3 years, where he was assigned a tour of 
duty on the Korean peninsula.
  He is survived by his loving daughter, Retha Allen; son, Andrew 
Allen; and 5 grandchildren, LeAnna, Maycan, Anaya, Clay, and Tayte. As 
a devoted family man, his children remember him for his kindness and 
down-to-earth nature. They fondly recall how attentive he was to his 
daughter, then only 13, when she was hospitalized for an entire month; 
how he would hike 3 miles through the wintry snow just to feed the 
livestock; and all the fun they shared on the familys one and only 
camping trip. Corporal Allen was a man of few words, but his words 
carried weight and respect from all who knew him.
  Please join me in thanking Corporal Danny K. Allen for his 
distinguished military service to the United States of America.
I rise today to honor Vietnam Era 
veteran and Purple Heart Recipient, Haskel Joe Hill (1947 through 2022) 
for his distinguished service in the U.S. Army. Hailing from Harriman, 
Tennessee, Haskel Hill served in the Army from October 1964 to October 
1973. He fought in Vietnam and was captured by enemy troops, being held 
as a prisoner of war. His bravery and heroism during the conflict and 
throughout his capture earned him the Purple Heart.
  Haskel Hill also received the Republic of Vietnam Gallantry Cross, 
awarded to him by the former government of South Vietnam, in 
recognition of his valor in combat with the enemy. While he safely 
returned to America, he passed away due to complications resulting from 
exposure to Agent Orange during the conflict. Haskel Hill is survived 
by his proud daughters, Ida L. Hendrix of Jacksonville, Florida, Helana 
J. Cormier of Green Cove Springs, Florida, and Alice Hill of Kingsport, 
Tennessee. Vietnam Era veterans and their surviving family members 
deserve our deepest gratitude for their service and sacrifice, and it 
is long past due.
  Please join me in remembering American hero and patriot, Haskel Hill 
for his strength, courage, and bravery. We are eternally grateful to 
him and his valiant military service to our great country.
I rise today to honor the life and legacy of 
Donald Woodfield. Sadly, Mr. Woodfield passed away on September 3, 
2023, at the age of 81.
  Donald Woodfield was born in Buffalo, New York on November 24, 1941. 
A lifelong patriot, Mr. Woodfield joined the U.S. Air Force, where he 
proudly served for 8 years, including during the Vietnam War. Among his 
many awards were the Vietnam Service Medal, the Air Force Commendation 
Medal and the National Defense Service Medal.
  Shortly after leaving the military, he was called again to a life of 
serving others and he pursued his passion of being a teacher. He served 
as an educator for over 30 years, both teaching and coaching at BNai 
Shalom, Ballinger Academy, Greensboro Day School in Greensboro, and 
finally The ONeal School in Southern Pines.
a profound love of teaching and mentoring young 
people, a notion that carried into nearly every aspect of his life. He 
was an avid golfer, pickle baller and active member of the local 
Southern Pines Veteran of Foreign Wars Post No. 7318, serving as 
quartermaster and holding numerous roles in the Military Order of the 
Cooties. Perhaps most importantly, Mr. Woodfield was a man of faith, 
who loved God and his family above all else.
, please join me today in honoring the life of Donald 
Woodfield and to offer our deepest condolences to his family and loved 
ones.
I rise to honor the Vietnam and Korean War 
veterans who traveled to Washington, D.C. on September 20, 2023, with 
Honor Flight Chicago, a program that provides WWII, Vietnam, and Korean 
War veterans the opportunity to visit their memorials on The National 
Mall in Washington, D.C. These memorials were built to honor their 
courage and service to their country.
  The American Veteran is one of our greatest treasures. The Soldiers, 
Airmen, Sailors, Marines, and Coast Guardsmen who traveled here on 
September 20th answered our nations call to service during one of its 
greatest times of need. From the Pacific Asian Theatre to the Korean 
Theater, these brave Americans risked life and limb, gave service, and 
sacrificed much, all while embodying what it is to be a hero. We owe 
them more gratitude than can ever be expressed.
  I welcome these brave veterans to Washington and their memorials. I 
am proud to include in the Record the names of these men and women for 
all to see, hear, and recognize, and I call on my colleagues to rise 
and join me in expressing gratitude.

       Ronald P. Aleo; Terry J. Baldwin; Henry J. Balkema; Robert 
     W. Becker, Sr.; Robert A. Bernacchi; Robert G. Blackwell; 
     Peter I. Boer; Dennis M. Bolsega; Daniel L. Bridy; Kenneth W. 
     Bruzek; William Bruzek; Carl J. Capolillo; Henry P. Castillo; 
     Donald A. Chivas;
       Robert Ciesiel; Thomas J. Cogozzo; Lidio S. Cordero; Leon 
     K. Dahlberg; Terry L. Davis; Leavy Deal, Jr.; Harry W. 
     DeBruin; John H. DeGroot; Richard A. DeHeer; Roger A. Dexter; 
     Frank P. Disler; Charles M. Doane; Arnold W. Domin; Richard 
     Dublin;
       Mark R. Dykstra; Donald J. Ferrone; Ralph E. Fisher; John 
     F. Fitzpatrick; Joseph J. Gallagher; Don J. Garrett; Larry G. 
     Garza; Dennis J. Gawczynski; Albert Giuliano; Kenneth M. 
     Gray; Eric A. Greene; David E. Grote; Frederick P. Guerrero; 
     Vince Gugliuzza; Robert J. Hahn; Robert A. Hudik; Charles E. 
     Hughes, Sr.; Gerald E. Ilc; James M. Inendino; James M. 
     Jacob; Richard E. Jensen; Donald L. Johnson;
       Raymond Jubera; James G. Karones; Jesse Kimp; George N. 
     Koch; James L. Koeling; Henry F. Kohut; Richard W. Kostecki; 
     Larry A. Krog; Donald J. Kucera; Charles A. Lazzara; Joseph 
     V. Lombardi; Frank S. LoPresti; Joseph Lubovich; Tommie T. 
     Lymon; John L. Maisura; Michael S. Malinowski; James P. 
     Mammoser; Leonard F. Marak; Glenn D. Marrs; Richard J. 
     Martin; Edward R. McCabe;
       Walter T. McCarthy; Robert W. McKee; Richard A. Meister; 
     Frank H. Michalek; Edward S. Moy; Dennis C. Northrop; Patrick 
     G. OConnell; John E. Painter, Jr.; Howard M. Parker; Joseph 
     A. Pesch, Jr.; David W. Piekarczyk; Richard S. Pincuspy; 
     Dennis C. Polakowski; Charles E. Pryor; Joseph R. Racine; 
     Carl A. Razor; Gerald L. Reese; James L. Riforgiato; Leo J. 
     Roberts; Ignacio Rodriguez;
       Robbie L. Rollins, Jr.; Laurence D. Rolph; Herbert R. 
     Rosen; James L. Rossbach; Angelo Sanchez; Glenn D. Sanders; 
     Leroy C. Schmitz; James J. Slacanin; Patrick E. Small; Dennis 
     L. Soszynski; Milan Stojkovic; David E. Strein; Michael J. 
     Stumpf; Anthony J. Sutylo; John E. Thompson; Edward J. 
     Trznadel; Ralph W. Tummond, Jr.; Richard H. Van Verst; Joseph 
     S. Varanauski; John W. Watkins; Geary L. Weaver; Maynard O. 
     Welch; Fontaine Winston, Jr.; Terry L. Xaverius; John T. 
     Zick, Jr.; and Thomas B. Zimnawoda.
had I been present, I would have voted YEA 
on Roll Call No. 392, YEA on Roll Call No. 393, and YEA on Roll Call 
No. 394.
I rise today to recognize Ms. 
Lavinia Perkins Mathis on the occasion of her 100th birthday.
  Born on September 24, 1923, in Jacksonville, Florida, Ms. Mathis is 
the proud daughter of Camilla Bolton Perkins, a Jacksonville elementary 
school teacher, and Daniel W. Perkins, a prominent lawyer in 
Jacksonville. Ms. Mathis and her 2 sisters grew up in the Lavilla 
neighborhood of Jacksonville where she attended a wooden 2-story 
schoolhouse. She graduated from Old Stanton High School in 1942.
A&amp;M College (now Florida A&amp;M University) 
and graduated in 1946 with a Bachelor of Science degree in Home 
Economics. For 30 years, she taught science in Duval County Public 
Schools including at James Weldon Johnson Jr. High, Stilwell Jr. High, 
and Northwestern Jr. High until 1977.
  On June 15, 1948, she married Clarence F. Mathis, and they had 2 
children Cecelia Mathis and Marcia Mathis. Ms. Mathis is also a proud 
grandmother of 3 and great-grandmother. A devoted Catholic, Ms. Mathis 
loves her family and the Lord.

  She became a Catholic while at Florida A&amp;M College and when Ms. 
Mathis returned home to Jacksonville, Florida she joined St. Pius V 
Catholic Church. While a member of St. Pius, she served on several 
committees including the Altar Rosary Society, the Welcome and 
Outreach, and All Saints Auxiliary.
a member of Alpha Kappa Alpha sorority and in 2019 
she became a Diamond member of Alpha Kappa Alpha having served 
faithfully as a member of the sorority for over 75 years.
  I am honored to recognize a dedicated servant to our community and 
the Lord, and I wish Ms. Mathis a wonderful 100th birthday.
I rise today in recognition of World War II 
veteran Lyle Tennis honorable service to our Nation and to wish him a 
happy 100th birthday.
  Lyle Tennis was born in Unity, Wisconsin on September 18, 1923, and 
resides in Racine, Wisconsin. Lyle joined the United States Navy as a 
Lieutenant during World War II.
  During his service in the Navy, his ship was the target of frequent 
and deadly Kamikaze attacks. During an attack, Lyle saved his 
crewmates lives by notifying the crew to abandon the ship before 
sinking and returning to the ship to rescue the remaining crew. Lyle 
was awarded the distinguished Navy Cross for his heroic actions.
  In addition to his Navy Cross, Lyle was awarded a Purple Heart, 
American Defense Medal, American Campaign Medal, Asiatic-Pacific 
Campaign Medal, WWII Victory Medal, Presidential Unit Citation, Combat 
Action Ribbon, and the Navy Unit Commendation.
  After WWII, Lyle served an additional 28 years in the Naval Reserves 
and had a career in education for 31 years. Lyle Tennis is a genuine 
American hero.
  On behalf of Wisconsins First Congressional District, I am honored 
to wish Lyle Tennis a happy 100th birthday and recognize his 
distinguished service to our Nation.
I rise today to recognize the 175th 
anniversary of Washington Gas, a leading provider of energy services in 
the national capital region.
  In 1848, Congress passed, and President James Polk signed, an Act 
that chartered the Washington Gas Light Company, making Washington Gas 
the first congressionally chartered gas company in the country. 
Washington Gas was originally responsible for installing gas lights in 
the United States Capitol, the White House, and along Pennsylvania 
Avenue in the District of Columbia. Washington Gas expanded its service 
into Maryland and Virginia around the turn of the 20th century, and 
today provides energy to more than 1.2 million residential, commercial, 
and industrial customers in the national capital region.
  Over the years, Washington Gas and its employees have supported 
various nonprofit, community, civic, and charitable organizations. This 
support has enhanced the quality of life for countless individuals and 
families in D.C., Maryland, and Virginia, providing millions of dollars 
for vocational training, job placements, and other paths to long-term 
employment, including more than $500,000 in scholarships for 
underrepresented students in science, technology, engineering, and 
mathematics.
  Since 2018 alone, Washington Gas philanthropic programs and 
initiatives have contributed more than $7 million in local support. 
This funding has advanced programs that support healthy and safe 
communities.
  Washington Gas employees have provided more than 140,000 hours of 
volunteer service since 2005 to organizations in D.C., Maryland, and 
Virginia, including the Capital Area Food Bank, Special Olympics DC, 
Healthy Babies Project, The Latino Student Fund, The Boys &amp; Girls Clubs 
of Greater Washington, INROADS, Junior Achievement, The March of Dimes, 
YMCA of Greater Washington, A Wider Circle, and The Leukemia &amp; Lymphoma 
Society.
  This year also marks the 40th anniversary of the Washington Area Fuel 
Fund (WAFF). Since 1983, WAFF has provided over $33 million to help 
more than 308,000 local families heat their homes during challenging 
times, no matter their heating source. Washington Gas pays all 
administrative fees to ensure that every WAFF dollar goes to a family 
in need.
, I ask the House of Representatives to join me in 
congratulating Washington Gas on its 175th anniversary and thanking 
Washington Gas for its service to its customers and community.
I rise today to celebrate an 
outstanding gentleman and dear friend, Dr. Matthew Causey. Dr. Causey 
departed this life on September 6, 2023. He was born on August 5, 1943, 
in New Orleans, Louisiana to the late Helen Kelly Jones and Matthew 
Causey. For most of his childhood, he grew up in St. Charles Parish in 
the small town of Killona. It was there that life-long values were 
formed under the loving and watchful eyes of his late grandparents, Eva 
and Andrew Kelly, Sr., and his 7 aunts and uncles. To him, his many 
first cousins were more like brothers and sisters, and to many close 
relatives, he was known as ``Snook.
  Dr. Causeys early education preparation culminated in his graduation 
from George Washington Carver High School in Hahnville, LA. Thereafter, 
he enrolled at Southern University at New Orleans (SUNO), and 
eventually transferred to the Baton Rouge campus, earning a Bachelor of 
Science degree in Mathematics Education in 1966. He began his 
professional career as a math teacher in Orleans Parish Public Schools 
at Samuel S. Green Junior High School.
  Always yearning to learn more, Matthew earned a Master of Science 
degree in Mathematics from Loyola University in New Orleans in 1970. 
Continuing his steadfast commitment to education, Matthew applied and 
was accepted into a doctoral program in mathematics education at the 
University of Houston. It was there that he met the love of his life, 
Lynette Smith, as they were both pursuing doctoral degrees. Upon 
completing their respective graduate programs, they returned to New 
Orleans. They married in 1978. Their lifelong love lasted 45 years and 
was the epitome of a love supreme. Their family grew to include 2 sons 
with a daughter in the middle: Erik Matthew Causey, Lauren Lynette 
Causey, and Alan Charles Causey.
  He was an exceptional husband and father, as well as a true ``Village 
Father who always worked to help as many children as he could. Dr. 
Causey sought to advance academic excellence at SUNO by teaching, 
motivating, and inspiring his students with a love of learning. He rose 
to the rank of Associate Professor, served as Chair of the Mathematics 
and Physics Department, was Dean of the College of Science, and served 
as Associate Vice Chancellor for Academic Affairs. Throughout his 
tenure, the defining principle underlying all his decisions was his 
sincere love and respect for the students and the university.
  His achievements were acknowledged in 1996 when he received the 
Presidential Faculty Excellence Award at SUNO. After a stellar and 
impactful career, Dr. Causey retired with more than 40 years of service 
to SUNO. Dr. Causeys involvement and contributions to education 
reached beyond the walls of classrooms and into the community.
  One of his proudest contributions is that in 1993, he was one of 
three trailblazing founders of the New Orleans Charter Science and 
Mathematics High School, which focused on enriching STEM initiatives 
for high school students. That school is still in operation today. Dr. 
Causey also wrote a chapter in a book, entitled Called to Sankofa, 
which was a narrative account of post-Katrina New Orleans, highlighting 
the importance of maintaining an education system following a disaster. 
His academic work and contribution extended to many professional and 
advocacy organizations.
  Dr. Causey was a long-time judge for the Regional Mathematics and 
Science Fair and was a board member of the Southwest Educational 
Development Laboratory. In appreciation for his involvement and 
contribution, he received numerous honors, awards, and special 
recognition from peers and community organizations. He was a proud 
member of Omega Psi Phi Fraternity, Inc. and was active for years in 
the Gamma Rho Chapter.
  Above all, Matthew was a man of Faith and a dedicated member of St. 
Paul the Apostle Catholic Church. He served as a longstanding member of 
the Finance Council. For his outstanding service to the church, in 2019 
he was

awarded the prestigious Order of St. Louis Medallion by the Archdiocese 
of New Orleans. Matthew loved woodworking, photography and traveling; 
however, cooking was his favorite special interest.
  He looked forward to cooking family-favorite dishes no matter how 
complicated, and he took great joy in the entire process. An 
accomplishment Matthew was extremely proud of was the publication of a 
cookbook that contained his favorite pictures and recipes. Matthew met 
lifes challenges with strength, humility, and Faith. Matthews 
kindness, gentleness and unassuming nature defined him, as he showed 
love to all he encountered. He had a calm demeanor and was spirit-
filled.
  Matthew was a loving husband, father, grandfather, uncle, cousin, and 
friend. He loved to learn, to laugh, to talk and to listen. He loved 
life and was just so easy to love. Matthew leaves to celebrate and 
cherish his life and legacy, his beloved wife of 45 years, Dr. Lynette 
Smith Causey; his devoted and adoring children: son, Erik Matthew 
Causey (Mowele), Arlington, VA; daughter, Dr. Lauren Lynette Causey, 
Thousand Oaks, CA; son, Lt. Col. Alan Charles Causey (Traci), Ft. 
Johnson, LA; his precious grandsons, Andrew, Cyril, and Gabriel Causey; 
his brother, Arthur Kelly Jones; his sister, Dianne Jones Smith; his 
aunt, Carol Pearson; his brother-in-law, Kevin J. Smith; his sister-in 
law, Ruth Evans Jones; a host of nieces, nephews, cousins, close 
relatives, and very special family friends. He was preceded in death by 
his mother, Helen Kelly Jones, his father Matthew Causey, and his 
brothers, Warren J. Jones, and Lionel Jones.
  The Students of Southern University of New Orleans and New Orleans 
Charter Science and Mathematics High School are eternally grateful for 
the vision, guidance, and leadership of Dr. Causey. He will be forever 
remembered for all his contributions to advancing their education.
Stephen Moore of the 
Committee to Unleash Prosperity provides a daily Hotline 
on economic issues facing American families. A very thoughtful analysis 
was distributed on September 18, 2023.
       ``House Budget Committee Chair Jody Arringtons [. . . 
     fiscal plan] wont solve our financial problems--but it will 
     stop the bleeding. `The plan reaches a balanced budget in 10 
     years without a penny of new taxes, said Arrington. `We grow 
     the economy and cut spending.
       ``The Democrats and Biden are hysterical and threatening to 
     shut down the government to keep the current runaway train of 
     spending over the cliff.
       ``To get a sense of the stakes here, consider that the 
     fastest growing component of the budget over the next 
     decade--other than the Green New Deal--is interest on the . . 
     . national debt. Interest payments, which will soon reach $1 
     trillion, will be like a Pacman swallowing up more and more 
     of the entire budget.
       ``Our ace economist EJ Antoni highlights a troubling trend. 
     Almost $8 trillion of low-interest-rate debt will roll over 
     at much higher rates. Instead of paying 2 and 3% interest on 
     bonds, we will be paying close to 5% and maybe more if the 
     Fed has to raise interest rates again. Biden has created a 
     fine fiscal mess, and it will take years to get out of it. 
     Arrington is right: lets start right now.
  In conclusion, God Bless our troops, who successfully protected 
America for 20 years, as the Global War on Terrorism continues moving 
from the Afghanistan safe haven to America with open Biden borders.
Title IV of Senate Resolution 4, agreed to by the Senate of February 
4, 1977, calls for establishment of a system for a computerized 
schedule of all meetings and hearings of Senate committees, 
subcommittees, joint committees, and committees of conference. This 
title requires all such committees to notify the Office of the Senate 
Daily Digest--designated by the Rules Committee--of the time, place and 
purpose of the meetings, when scheduled and any cancellations or 
changes in the meetings as they occur.
  As an additional procedure along with the computerization of this 
information, the Office of the Senate Daily Digest will prepare this 
information for printing in the Extensions of Remarks section of the 
Congressional Record on Monday and Wednesday of each week.
  Meetings scheduled for Thursday, September 21, 2023 may be found in 
the Daily Digest of todays Record.

     9:30 a.m.
       Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs
         Business meeting to consider S. 2860, to create 
           protections for financial institutions that provide 
           financial services to State-sanctioned marijuana 
           businesses and service providers for such businesses.
                                                            SD-538
     10 a.m.
       Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry
         To hold hearings to examine foreign ownership in U.S. 
           agriculture.
                                                           SR-328A
       Committee on the Budget
         To hold hearings to examine Medicare.
                                                            SD-106
       Committee on Environment and Public Works
         To hold an oversight hearing to examine the General 
           Services Administration, focusing on examining the 
           Federal real estate portfolio.
                                                            SD-406
     10:30 a.m.
       Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs
       Subcommittee on Securities, Insurance, and Investment
         To hold hearings to examine the state of flood insurance 
           in America.
                                                            SD-538
     11 a.m.
       Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
         Business meeting to consider the nominations of Thomas G. 
           Day, of Virginia, to be a Commissioner of the Postal 
           Regulatory Commission, and Katherine E. Oler, Judith E. 
           Pipe, and Charles J.

           Willoughby, Jr., each to be an Associate Judge of the 
           Superior Court of the District of Columbia.
                                                            SD-562
     2:30 p.m.
       Committee on Indian Affairs
         To hold hearings to examine water as a trust resource, 
           focusing on access in Native communities.
                                                            SD-628
     3:30 p.m.
       Committee on Rules and Administration
         To hold hearings to examine AI and the future of our 
           elections.
                                                            SR-301

     9:30 a.m.
       Committee on Armed Services
         To hold hearings to examine the nominations of Derek H. 
           Chollet, of Nebraska, to be Under Secretary for Policy, 
           and Cara L. Abercrombie, of Virginia, to be an 
           Assistant Secretary, both of the Department of Defense.
                                                            SD-G50
     10 a.m.
       Committee on Energy and Natural Resources
         To hold hearings to examine opportunities to counter the 
           Peoples Republic of Chinas control of critical 
           mineral supply chains through increased mining and 
           processing in the United States as well as 
           international engagement and trade.
                                                            SD-366
       Committee on Environment and Public Works
       Subcommittee on Chemical Safety, Waste Management, 
           Environmental Justice, and Regulatory Oversight
         To hold hearings to examine solutions to address beverage 
           container waste.
                                                            SD-406