CELEBRATING THE GRAND OPENING OF THE EAST WIND FOUNDATION FOR YOUTHS 
                             of california
I rise today to celebrate the Grand Opening 
of the East Wind

Foundation for Youths Chinatown Community Cultural Center.
  Since opening its doors in 1972, the East Wind Foundation for Youth 
has been committed to empowering young Angelenos to become the next 
generation of global leaders. Headquartered in Chinatown, this non-
profit equips young people with the skills they need to cultivate an 
inclusive community that brings families, friends and neighbors 
together while honoring their Chinese culture.
  The East Wind Foundation for Youth hosts countless cultural programs 
throughout the year, such as their annual essay writing contest, lion 
dance performances, martial art training and community service. Through 
these opportunities, young people are encouraged to think critically, 
build up their self-confidence and create lasting friendships while 
celebrating their shared Chinese heritage.
  While the foundations programming is aimed at uplifting students, 
its impacts reverberate throughout our Los Angeles neighborhoods, 
improving the lives of families and entire communities. By providing 
creative and academic outlets for students, the foundation is reducing 
the likelihood that young people engage in gang violence, and is thus 
promoting safer neighborhoods.
  The grand opening of the Chinatown Community Cultural Center allows 
the non-profit to further expand its arts and educational services to 
constituents of Californias 34th Congressional District, with a focus 
on the history of Chinese Americans in Los Angeles as well as the 
history of the organization.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in celebrating this 
milestone for the East Wind Foundation for Youth.
today, we celebrate the 20th anniversary of 
New Image Youth Center located in the Parramore neighborhood of 
Orlando. New Image Youth Centers contributions over the past 20 years 
cannot be measured. With just $5 and a game of Monopoly, the mustard 
seed was sown, and NIYC was born. Founded by licensed therapist, 
entrepreneur, and author Dr. Shanta Barton Stubbs, her goal was to 
transform the narrative of the Parramore community and shift the 
mindset from surviving to thriving.
  New Image Youth Center prides itself on being a safe haven for K-12 
Orlando youth. For the past 20 years, their dedicated staff and 
volunteers have equipped their youth with the tools and space to pursue 
their wildest dreams. New Image provides mentorship and programming 
rooted in mental health counseling, academic support, social 
development, and more. Their love for their kids goes beyond the call 
of duty by serving and supporting them till their adult years as they 
seek employment and post-secondary education.
  I thank New Image Youth Center for 20 years of dedication and 
service. Their contributions continue to make a profound difference in 
our community, and we are grateful for their support and commitment to 
make Central Florida a better place for all.
I wish to take the opportunity to 
commemorate the anniversary of the Stonewall Uprising on June 28, a key 
milestone in the march for equality for gay, lesbian, bisexual, 
transgender, queer, and intersex--or LGBTQI+--Americans. Fifty-five 
years ago, the courageous Marsha P. Johnson, Sylvia Rivera, and Storme 
DeLarverie of New York City resisted police brutality against lesbian, 
gay, and transgender minorities in what is known as the Stonewall 
Uprising. Their legacies continue today to inspire and energize many 
Americans to respect the differences we have and advocate for the 
expansion of equal rights for all people.
  The fight for equality is an ongoing battle, especially with right-
wing, extremist Republicans prioritizing hate and discrimination 
against the LGBTQI+ community people, in general, and transgender 
people, specifically, as a political bludgeon designed to divide our 
country. These extremist Republicans are determined to reverse any 
civil rights protections already won by the LGBTQI+ community, such as 
affirming medical care, the right to marriage, and housing access.
  I know first-hand the cruelty and injustice of discrimination. These 
efforts contradict the democratic values we hold dearly in this 
country. As a result, I have prioritized, advocated, and supported 
civil rights and social justice throughout my public service career 
because everyone deserves to live free of discrimination and injustice. 
As a member of the Equality Caucus, I am a proud original co-sponsor of 
the Stonewall Day Resolution that would recognize June 28th as 
Stonewall Day and the strides made to support equal rights for all. 
Further, as an original cosponsor of the Equality Act, I have voted to 
pass out of the House this essential legislation that would modify the 
Civil Rights Act of 1964 to reduce discrimination based on sexual 
orientation and gender identity. My home state of Illinois has laws 
that ensure robust nondiscrimination protections for LGBTQI+ 
individuals, and it is time that the federal government enact similar 
policies to protect Americans across the Nation.
  As a leader in improving child welfare law, I also lead the John 
Lewis Every Child Deserves a Family Act that would protect foster youth 
and foster parents from discrimination based on religion, marital 
status, and who they love. We must ensure that each and every child in 
foster care finds a loving, affirming family.
  I believe that, by recognizing the historic movements for LGBTQI+ 
people in American history, we celebrate how diverse our society is, a 
diversity that makes our nation richer and more vibrant. Let us 
celebrate those from Stonewall who risked their lives and all who work 
tirelessly to expand civil rights for all LGBTQI+ people.
Collin Lee Teem, of 
Lexington, South Carolina, was Killed in Action in Ukraine on May 11, 
2024. I am greatly saddened by his death and humbled by his sacrifice. 
Collin is a true American hero, who sacrificed his life fighting for 
freedom and democracy in the Global War on Terrorism and the War of 
Dictators Invading Democracies. As citizens throughout our community 
continue to cope with this tragic loss, my thoughts and prayers will 
remain with Collins family, his friends and his fellow service 
members.
  I include in the Record the following obituary for Collin Lee Teem:
       Collin Lee Teem, age 23, was born March 30, 2001 in 
     Florida. His family moved to Lexington, South Carolina in 
     2002 where he lived and grew up the remainder of his 
     childhood. He graduated high school in June 2019 then 
     followed his dreams, and in July 2019, left for the United 
     States Marine Corp Boot Camp. Collin then spent the next 4 
     years as a machine gunner in infantry. During his Marine Corp 
     active duty time, he received Good Conduct medal, National 
     Defense Service medal, Global war on Terrorism Expeditionary 
     medal, Global war on Terrorism Service medal, Sea Service 
     Deployment ribbon (2), Sharpshooter Rifle Qualification 
     badge, and Expert Pistol Qualification badge. Collin also 
     completed Advanced Machine Gun training/course. Collin 
     received an honorable DD214 discharge middle of July 2023. 
     Teem then went on to volunteer his skills and military 
     services to join the fight in Ukraine in their time of need. 
     Collin left the United States in Sept 2023 and arrived in 
     Kyiv where he then joined forces with International Legion of 
     Defense. Collin served with Ukraine from September 2023 until 
     he was unfortunately Killed in Action on May 11, 2024. Collin 
     Teems passions were evident in his life. He lived a life 
     passionate about his hobbies, fun experiences, military 
     service, and freedom. He lived life to the fullest and always 
     tried to lighten the load of others around him--physically 
     and mentally. He brought laughter to many. His enthusiasm and 
     smile were infectious. Its been said that All people die but 
     not All people live, Collin lived! He accomplished and packed 
     so much in his short 23 years. He did what he loved. He 
     touched countless lives by simply just being himself. Many 
     have said he marched to his own beat which lead to many 
     ``Teem Shenanigans as his Marine Corp leadership once told 
     us. Collin leaves behind his mother, father, 3 brothers, 1 
     sister, 2 nephews, 2 nieces, as well as grandparents, aunts, 
     uncles, cousins, countless friends, and military brothers and 
     sisters. Collin Teem will always be remembered for his love 
     of fishing, hunting, military service aka guns, warm weather, 
     and a life full of love, laughter, and adventure. But most of 
     all, for his dedication, determination, selflessness, 
     heroism, and sacrifice for All mankind. He will be dearly 
     missed by so many, near and far.
       Legend and Hero to all who knew him.
       #Forever23YoullBe
       His family will hold Memorial Services to Honor the Life of 
     Collin both in his home town on the East Coast on July 6, 
     2024, as well as in a place he fell in love with, grew, and 
     was stationed during his Marine Corp time--on the West 
     Coast--in California--date TBD.
HONORING COLONEL K. ``CHAD MIXON ON HIS APPOINTMENT AS GARRISON 
                           of north carolina
I rise today to congratulate Colonel Mixon 
on his appointment as Garrison Commander of Fort Liberty.
  Colonel K. ``Chad Mixon began his military career in 1993 as an 
enlisted infantryman at Fort Bragg, NC. Now known as Fort Liberty, it 
is the home of the Airborne and Special Operations Forces and is the 
worlds largest military installation. Colonel Mixons more than 30-
year career in the United States Army includes commissions within North 
Carolina and would extend to positions at both Fort McPherson, Georgia, 
and Fort Polk, Louisiana.
  I am honored to recognize Colonel Mixons accomplishments and am 
forever grateful for the service of the men and women throughout the 
United States Armed Forces. Colonel Mixon would return to Fort Liberty, 
North Carolina in April of 2010 as a Supply and Services Troop 
Commander, Squadron Operations Officer and Squadron Executive Officer 
in the U.S. Army Special Operations Command. He served as Logistics 
Operations Officer in the Deputy Chief of Staff at Headquarters, Forces 
Command and would be appointed as the 307th BSB Battalion Commander in 
2016 before transitioning to the Joint Special Operations Command as 
the J4 Chief of Operations.
  Over the course of 12 years Colonel Mixon would deploy in seven 
overseas operations including three deployments in Iraq and two in 
Kuwait. Colonel Mixon has been extensively decorated and awarded for 
his military contributions. His diverse military endeavors extend to 
the Carolinas Collegiate Institutes, serving as a Transportation 
Officer through the Campbell University Army ROTC Program as well as a 
Professor of Military Science at the University of South Carolina. 
Colonel Mixons devotion to his country and our great state is beyond 
admirable and is accomplished through the support of his wife, 
Charlotte, and two sons, Chase and Cole. His appointment is well 
deserved, and I look forward to celebrating his future success.
, please join me today in congratulating Colonel K. 
``Chad Mixon and thanking him for immense diligence and dedication in 
his service.
I rise today to celebrate a 
most beloved woman of faith in her centennial year, Mrs. Mary Louise 
Bishop-Brown.
-Brown, the eldest of nine children, was born on June 24, 
1924 to King Bishop and Julia Nesmith Bishop in Dorsey Town, South 
Carolina. Having given her life to the Lord, Mary established her first 
faith connections while attending St. Marks African Methodist 
Episcopal Church as a young girl. In young adulthood, she took a job 
working as a cook. However, Marys interests quickly expanded beyond 
the kitchen when she met Miley Brown, the love of her life. At first 
sight, the two were immediately smitten and bound for a bountiful 
future together. Though this relationship would be put on hold due to 
, nothing could 
keep these two from their eventual marriage on October 26, 1946.
  Blessed to grow up in a large and loving family, Mary knew that was 
what she wanted for her and Miley. They went on to have seven 
children--Jackie, Ethel, Miley Jr., Wanda Annette, Herbert, Marilyn, 
Murray Lee, and Emma Jane. Mary also raised Sean, her grandson, as her 
own. Being believers and people of faith, Mary and Miley prioritized 
keeping their family rooted in the Word of God. They brought their 
children up in the St. James Missionary Baptist Church, where they were 
spiritually and emotionally nurtured through Sunday School and weekly 
church services. Additionally, Mary kept busy with church duties, 
singing in the choir and cooking for various church events, whether 
that be for anniversaries, church unions, funerals, or whenever else 
she was called upon. However, with sunshine there must come rain. 
Marys heart became overwhelmed with sadness when Miley passed away on 
December 23, 2001. With that said, nothing could keep Mary from 
bringing goodness to all she met with and joy to those around her. She 
now lives in Fairburn, Georgia, where she lives with her youngest 
daughter, Marilyn.
  Mary embodies what it means to be a righteous person of faith. She 
has lived several lifetimes in her 100 years on this planet and 
witnessed numerous changes in our nation throughout the years. Despite 
this, she never stopped being who she was, and loved all who crossed 
her path. ``Do unto others as you would have them done unto you--this 
is the golden rule Mrs. Bishop-Brown stood by. I hope that we can all 
learn from her example as we celebrate her long, continued life.
  May God continue to bless Mrs. Mary Louise Bishop-Brown.
today I rise to present Laura McKee, 
Assistant Chief Inflight Refueler and member of the 72nd Air Refueling 
Squadron, with the Sheila Corcoran Hoosier Hero Award for this month of 
June. Inspired by its namesake, this award was created to highlight 
exemplary Hoosier women veterans whose service to their community, 
country, and nation is unparalleled.
  Called to be a freedom fighter, Laura McKee worked to proudly serve 
her country by acquiring a bachelors certificate from Indiana 
University and two associates degrees from the Community College of the 
Air Force.

Equipped with the skills she garnered from her Aviation Operation 
Aircraft Technology and Systems Maintenance Technology degrees, Laura 
McKee provided vital assistance to the Iraqi and Enduring Freedom 
Operations. Her service in combating authoritative beliefs, insurgency, 
and securing a free world is admirable.
  The experiences she collected while deployed not only fueled her 
aspirations to support a free, just world, but broadened her scope of 
how she can best support the peers that came before and after her as 
military personnel. Today, she is among Indianas champions for women 
veterans, and she strives to increase veteran education and access to 
federal and state benefits and resources. Having recently been named 
Indianas first Womens Veterans Coordinator for Indiana Veterans 
Affairs, I am confident her recent appointment will continue to create 
a positive impact for all veteran women.
  Today, I ask my colleagues to join me in honoring Laura McKee as we 
celebrate her legacy of outstanding accomplishments and advocacy.
I rise to celebrate the life of Rhys 
Taylor Frost, president of the Donora Fire Company, who sadly passed 
away on June 24, 2024.
  Rhys was born and raised in Donora, Pennsylvania. He had a passion 
for his local community and always wanted to be a first responder to 
help those in need.
  At only 14 years old, Rhys became a volunteer firefighter at the 
Donora Fire Company and later became an emergency medical technician 
(EMT) in 2018. Through his determination and selfless work ethic, he 
became president of the company a year later in 2019. Rhys never 
stopped finding ways to serve southwestern Pennsylvania and always 
answered the call of duty.
  It was his dream to simultaneously serve as a policeman, EMT, and 
firefighter, a testament to his desire to protect and defend his 
community. Those who knew Rhys best will never forget his infinite 
selflessness and his eternal love for Donora. As the community comes 
together to celebrate his life and legacy, I am grateful for his vast 
impact on our commonwealth and his fellow Pennsylvanians.
, Rhys Taylor Frost dedicated his life to the people of 
Donora. His legacy is an example of a selfless and inspiring life. On 
behalf of the people of Pennsylvanias 14th Congressional District, I 
wish his family healing during this difficult time.
I rise today to honor Mr. 
John L. Eunice, III, who is retiring after over 40 years of dedicated 
service in the U.S. Air Force.
1981 after receiving his commission 
from the United States Air Force Academy and served for twenty-seven 
years on active duty, achieving the rank of Colonel. While on active 
duty, he served two command tours, serving as Commander of the 36th and 
347th Civil Engineer Squadrons.
  For the last sixteen years of his career, Mr. Eunice served as Deputy 
Base Civil Engineer for Moody Air Force Base in Lowndes County, 
Georgia. During this period, the outstanding performance, professional 
competence, and ceaseless efforts of Mr. Eunice resulted in the 
completion of twenty military construction projects and modernization 
projects supporting both the 23d and 93d wings. His guidance was 
recently instrumental in the development of the 23d Wings F-35 bed-
down plan.
, partnering with Lowndes County on the operation of 
the base water and wastewater treatment plants, a shared-use golf 
course, and municipal services agreements. His efforts led to the first 
Defense Community Infrastructure Program project in the State of 
Georgia, contributing to the 23d Wing and Lowndes County being awarded 
the 2023 Air Force Community Partnership award.
  I am honored to represent distinguished public servants and veterans 
like Mr. John Eunice. I wish him the best in his well-deserved 
retirement.
today, I introduce the REAL ID Gender 
Requirement Reform Act, which would remove the requirement from the 
REAL ID Act that REAL ID-compliant licenses include gender. Instead, 
the decision of whether to have gender on a states REAL-ID-compliant 
licenses would be left to the states. I am pleased Representative 
Maxwell Frost is co-leading this bill.
  This bill would require states that require gender designation for 
licenses to allow individuals wishing to change their gender 
designation on their license to do so through self-attestation. It 
would also require states that require gender designation on licenses 
to have a neutral or other designation gender field, in addition to 
male or female.
  Under the REAL ID Act, gender must be included on a license. This can 
be problematic for transgender or nonbinary individuals. I recognize 
that some LGBTQ+ individuals do not want gender designations on 
licenses at all, while others do want gender designation so as to 
express their identity. I believe this bill strikes the middle ground, 
while showing Congress support for LGBTQ+ individuals.
  This is an important bill for equality. I urge my colleagues to 
support this bill.
I was having a medical 
procedure and was unable to be

  On June 27, 2024, page E678, in the first column, the following 
appeared: Mr. WILSON of South Carolina. I was having a medical 
procedure and was unable to be
  
  The online version has been corrected to read: Mr. WILSON of 
South Carolina. Mr. Speaker, I was having a medical procedure and 
was unable to be

 present. Had I been present, I would have voted YEA on Roll Call No. 
 281, (H.R. 7152); YEA on Roll Call No. 280, (H. Res. 901); and YEA on 
Roll Call No. 282, (H.R. 2789).
I rise to recognize Pleasanton Unified 
School District Superintendent David Haglund on his retirement after 
seven years of service with the Pleasanton Unified School District on 
Thursday, August 1, 2024.
  A native of Southern California, David received his Bachelors degree 
from Hope International University in 1985. He immediately took his 
talents to the classroom and began teaching for ten years. He then 
returned to school to receive his Masters degree in Educational 
Leadership from California Baptist University and a Doctorate in urban 
school leadership from the University of Southern California.
  David began his career in school administration by serving the 
Riverside Unified School District in various leadership roles for 15 
years.
  When he began his tenure with Pleasanton Unified School District, 
David immediately addressed some of the districts most pressing 
issues. He stewarded a $270 million bond measure for school facility 
upgrades and fiercely advocated for several other policies and measures 
that improved student performance and experience.
  David states that his favorite moments of each school year are the 
fist day of school and graduation, because they provide him the 
opportunity to tell every student how proud he is of them.
  From his experience in the classroom to leading an entire school 
district, David has firsthand experience in every aspect of the 
educational process. He has demonstrated a level of connection with 
students, staff, and community members that every educator should 
strive for. His commitment to improving the learning environment of 
every student and staff member will be evident long after his 
retirement.
  I thank David for his exceptional educational leadership at the 
Pleasanton Unified School District for seven years. His cheerful 
presence and creative thinking will be deeply missed. I wish him well-
deserved rest and relaxation as he returns to Southern California to 
spend time with his family, including his three grandchildren.
I rise to honor Louisiana 
State Representative Kimberly Coates for her efforts to pass HB 467, a 
bill expanding access to Fresh Natural Milk.
  Louisianas unfounded prohibition on natural milk was primarily a 
consequence of Federal interference. Despite fresh natural milks 
benefits, the FDA holds that only pasteurized dairy should be consumed. 
Requiring the dairy industry to abide by this standard ensures the 
destruction of natural milks holistic composition.
  HB 467 legalizes the sale of natural milk and dairy products, 
reinstating freedom of choice to Louisiana consumers, and providing 
millions of Americans with access to an uncorrupted source of nutrients 
and health. In its natural state, fresh milk is a nearly perfect food.
  Hundreds of studies have confirmed a connection between 
pasteurization and lactose intolerance, concluding that pasteurized 
milks molecular decomposition allows it to seep through the gut, 
resulting in various health afflictions. Fresh, natural milk that has 
forgone pasteurization retains self-contained enzymes, facilitating its 
digestion and conferment of health. Accordingly, Representative Coates 
``Fresh Natural Milk Bill will provide millions of Louisianans with a 
previously unrealized ability to consume dairy.
  Representative Coates work, guiding HB 467 through both chambers of 
the Louisiana State Legislature, is to be commended. Her bill passed 
the Louisiana House of Representatives in a 96-1 vote and through the 
Louisiana State Senate in a 32-3 vote. These wide margins of support 
reflect Representative Coates determination and skill as a legislator.
  Representative Coates legislation will benefit many Louisiana 
citizens, including our farmers, dairy producers, and consumers. I 
commend Representative Coates and congratulate her on HB 467s signing 
into Louisiana law.
today I rise to honor the life of Dr. Paul 
Raymond Buitron, a pillar of our community, for his 49 years of 
dedicated service to patients in Laredo and South Texas. His 
contributions to our medical community saved his patients lives and 
exemplified selfless care throughout South Texas.
  The highly personal nature of his care made Dr. Paul Raymond Buitron 
stand above the rest. Dr. Buitron compassionately tailored treatment 
plans for his patients, whom he knew well. His commitment to their 
well-being extended far beyond traditional medicine, he worked to 
foster open communication and build deep, trusting relationships with 
his patients. Buitrons treatment was the perfect example of what a 
doctor should provide theft community.
. He received his 
undergraduate degree from Texas A&amp;M University before moving south in 
1975 to earn his medical degree at the Universidad Autonoma De San Luis 
Potosi Facultad De Mediona in Mexico. After his journey through medical 
school, Dr. Buitron found his passion in otolaryngology, also known as 
ear, nose, and throat, at St. Joseph Hospital. He then completed his 
residency at the University of Louisville School of Medicine before 
returning to Laredo to secure his Texas State Medical license, where he 
served local patients ever since.
  Dr. Buitron may have passed away earlier this month, but his memory 
will continue to resonate in the hearts and minds of the South Texans 
who knew him. He leaves behind his son and two daughters, Paul Raymond 
Buitron, Ill, Delilah Buitron Arrebola, and Dubelza Buitron, as well as 
his grandchildren, Nara Buitron, Paul Raymond Buitron IV, Olivia 
Buitron, Lennon Wolfgang Gardener, and Ringo Sebastian Arrebola. Dr. 
Paul Raymond Buitron provided compassionate care and demonstrated 
unwavering dedication to his patients, leaving a lasting legacy in the 
Laredo community.