I rise to commend Mrs. Kimberly ``Kim 
Leach-Wright for her outstanding service at the U.S. Department of 
Justice, Executive Office for Immigration Review.
  For more than 40 years, Mrs. Leach-Wright has been a dedicated public 
servant. She

started her career in 1983 as a student at the U.S. Department of 
Commerce, Patent and Trade Office. Later, in 1985, she joined the U.S. 
Department of Justice, Marshals Service where she worked to advance 
their mission of enforcing federal laws and aided various elements of 
the federal justice system. Over the last 22 years, she has served in 
the role of Supervisory Case Management Specialist of the East Team at 
the Clerks Office where she has been committed to coaching employees 
and nurturing their professional growth into long-term career 
successes. She is described in the office as energetic, funny, and 
committed to helping others--an invaluable set of skills that will be 
greatly missed.
  Early on, Mrs. Leach-Wright demonstrated her skills and received the 
Executive of Immigration Review Directors Award for her excellence in 
General Legal Support in 2001. In recognition of her leadership, she 
received the Executive of Immigration Review Directors Award again in 
2020.
  Her dedication, commitment, and passion for serving others is 
inspiring. Her contributions as a Team Leader help shape our future by 
both empowering professionals with knowledge and inspiring them to 
continue to learn. I am honored to recognize Mrs. Leach-Wright for her 
unwavering service to our country.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in thanking Mrs. Kimberly 
Leach-Wright for her dedication to public service over the last 40 
years. I join her friends and loved ones in celebrating her 
contributions and in wishing her the best as she retires to spend time 
with her husband, Ron, and her grandchildren.
today I rise to thank Secretary of the 
Navy Carlos Del Toro for exonerating the Port Chicago 50 after a second 
review of their case since 1994, correcting 80 years of injustice. As 
the Congressman for Port Chicago, California, I am pleased that justice 
delayed is no longer justice denied for these American veterans of 
World War II and their families.
  On July 17, 1944, a tragic munitions explosion at the Port Chicago 
Naval Magazine killed 320 sailors and civilian workers, the majority of 
whom were African American. While white officers were given time off 
following the accident, white Navy officers ordered African American 
sailors to return to work in the same unsafe conditions that killed 
their fellow servicemembers. When 50 of these men refused, they were 
wrongfully charged with mutiny and convicted in a hastily conducted 
trial overshadowed by the scourge of racism.
  The convictions of the Port Chicago 50 were not just a miscarriage of 
justice; they were emblematic of the broader racial prejudice that 
African Americans faced within the military and society at large, even 
while serving in their countrys uniform or contributing to the war 
effort on the Homefront as civilian workers. These men stood against 
dangerous conditions and racial discrimination, maintaining their 
innocence up until their deaths decades later.
  Public outrage over their Navy trail and conviction lead to the U.S. 
Navy becoming the first military service branch to officially 
desegregate in 1946, helping to civil rights for all Americans. 
President Truman ordered the desegregation of all U.S. military service 
branches in 1948. In 1999, President Clinton pardoned Freddie Meeks, 
one of the three surviving sailors of the Port Chicago 50 and the only 
to request one. The two other surviving sailors declined a presidential 
pardon, refusing to ask for clemency for a crime for which they were 
wrongfully convicted. All three men have since passed away.
  Exoneration of the Port Chicago 50 is a long overdue step in 
addressing historical injustices and affirming our national commitment 
to equality for all service members and all Americans regardless of 
race or creed. Now, 80 years later, the families of the Port Chicago 50 
finally have closure and justice. I am proud to stand with the families 
of these World War II veterans and my colleagues, Representatives Mark 
DeSaulnier and Barbara Lee, in celebrating this historic moment. By 
exonerating them, we honor their memory and rightful place in American 
history, ensuring their legacy is remembered with dignity and as early 
leaders who helped to inspire what later became the American civil 
rights movement.
I rise to congratulate Timothy Murphy as 
one of this years recipients of the University of Buffalos 
Presidents Medal. The University of Buffalos Presidents Medal 
recognizes those who have made extraordinary contributions to the 
quality of life and development in the Universitys community. I can 
think of no one who is more deserving of this award than Dr. Timothy 
Murphy.
  Dr. Murphy is an internationally recognized expert in respiratory 
infections and has transformed the way the medical community approaches 
them. His research has made significant breakthroughs in the 
understanding of bacterial infections in chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease and vaccine development for both ear infections and COPD.
  Outside of his groundbreaking research, Dr. Murphy is the founding 
director of the University at Buffalo Clinical and Translational 
Science Institute, which advances research throughout the University 
and its partners to reduce health disparities in our community. With a 
team of approximately 40 faculty and 118 staff members, the Institute 
has catalyzed a transformation of the clinical and translational 
research environment. More recently, the University at Buffalo launched 
the Community Health Equity Research Institute under Dr. Murphys 
leadership. Working closely with community partners and faculty from 
all 12 schools at UB, the Institute works to support research that 
address the root cause of health disparities while developing and 
testing solutions to the social determinants that cause them.
  Once again, I would like to congratulate Dr. Timothy Murphy on his 
well-deserved achievement of receiving the University of Buffalos 
Presidents Medal. I thank him for his tremendous efforts to advance 
the medical field all while supporting his community.
I rise today on behalf of the California 
Democratic Congressional Delegation to honor the public service of 
Katie Wheeler Mathews, as she retires from her role as Senior Advisor 
for Federal Affairs for the State of California. Katies career in 
state government spans over 36 years and is characterized by dedicated 
service, a bipartisan spirit, and a profound commitment to her home 
state of California.
  Katie has worked across five gubernatorial administrations under both 
Democratic and Republican governors, demonstrating a unique ability to 
bridge political divides. Her tenure in Washington, D.C., has been 
marked by tireless advocacy for Californias policy priorities and 
effective collaboration with our congressional offices and other 
federal partners. Prior to that, she spent eight years in the 
California Governors office in Sacramento, fostering partnerships and 
crafting solutions across geographical divides.
  Katie has been a formidable advocate for Californias interests 
before Congress, across multiple federal administrations, and before 
organizations such as the National Governors Association and the 
Western Governors Association. Her understanding of complex policy 
issues and ability to navigate the intricacies of federal-state 
relations have made her a valuable member of the Governors office, 
including her work in recent years to support Californias leadership 
on climate, immigration, and combatting the fentanyl crisis. Katies 
extensive government experience and relationships with leaders on both 
sides of the aisle have solidified her reputation as a trusted advisor 
to many.
, please join me in extending a heartfelt appreciation to 
Katie Wheeler Mathews for her outstanding service to the State of 
California and in wishing her the best in her next chapter. California 
is better for her service, and we thank her for it.
this year marks the 50th anniversary of 
Maggie Valleys incorporation as a municipality in North Carolina. Home 
to about 1,800 North Carolinians, Maggie Valleys rich history predates 
the towns official incorporation by many years.
  Located in Haywood County, the Eastern Band of Cherokee Indians 
occupied this region prior to the first White settlers. In the early 
1800s, mountain settlers began to move into the valley and brought with 
them the characteristics that still define Maggie Valley--self-
sufficiency, resourcefulness, independence and free-thinking.
  In 1890, one of the valleys residents, Jack Setzer, became fed up 
with having to pay someone to take and pick up mail from the nearest 
post office located five miles away. Setzer began contacting officials 
with the United States Postal Service to establish a post office in his 
area that everyone in the valley could use.
  When the U.S. postmaster general approved the creation of the post 
office, authorities requested that Setzer submit three potential names. 
He gave them the names of his three daughters: Cora, Mettie, and Maggie 
Mae.
  On May 10, 1904, Jack received a letter from the U.S. Postmaster 
General Frank Hitchcock that postal authorities had decided on a name: 
Maggie, North Carolina.
  In 1974, the North Carolina General Assembly voted to approve Maggie 
Valley as an official municipality and approved the towns formation of 
a local government, consisting of a mayor and a five-member board of 
aldermen.
  Maggie Valley serves as the gateway to the Great Smoky Mountain 
National Park and the Blue Ridge Parkway. The towns proximity to these 
two attractions allows thousands of visitors to experience the beauty 
of Maggie Valley each year.
  This year commemorates Maggie Valleys five decades as an official 
town. As residents celebrate the 50th anniversary this week, they honor 
the virtues and traditions that have defined Maggie Valley for half a 
century and look to carry those forward for 50 more years.
HONORING MR. GENE LEEHANS RETIREMENT FROM CLEAR CHANNEL OUTDOOR NORTH 
                                of texas
today, I rise to congratulate a fellow Texan 
upon his retirement on July 19th. Mr. Gene Leehan is a past president 
of the Outdoor Advertising Association of Texas (OAAT) and has worked 
in the out of home advertising industry for 38 years. Mr. Leehan is 
retiring from his position as Executive Vice President and Senior 
Regional President of Clear Channel Outdoor North America (CCOA).
  Over the years, CCOA and the Texas association have been key partners 
with federal and state agencies in times of emergency, using outdoor 
advertising assets to display important public messaging. This 
partnership has been valuable to constituents in my district, and to 
all Texans, including recently with Hurricane Beryl.
  In recognition of his many industry contributions, Mr. Leehan was 
inducted into the out of home advertising Hall of Fame in 2015. Mr. 
Leehans public service also includes work with the National 
Multicultural Western Heritage Museum, a Texas non-profit that 
recognizes pioneers of the American western frontier.
  Again, I want to congratulate Mr. Leehan on a long and fulfilling 
career.
Mr Speaker, I rise along with the people of St. Louis today 
to solemnly pay homage to the Nurse Honor Guard of Saint Louis and its 
visionary founder and president, Aine Howard-Boerner, MSN.
  Since its establishment in 2023, the Nurse Honor Guard of Saint Louis 
has emerged as a beacon of compassion dedicated to honoring nurses 
nearing or entering eternal rest, offering solace to grieving families 
across Missouri and Illinois.
  Inspired by the tradition of military honor guards that honor fallen 
servicemen and women, police officers, and firefighters, the Nurse 
Honor Guard wears traditional white nursing uniforms, complete with a 
red and blue cape and traditional nursing caps. They attend the 
funerals of their fellow nurses, paying homage and extending comfort to 
families in their time of mourning.
  The organization has conducted 124 memorial tributes, four living 
tributes, and one memorial table for departed colleagues. Comprised of 
30 retired and active nurses, these tributes honor the departed and 
serve as a source of renewal for the members of the Nurse Honor Guard 
amidst the formidable challenges and demands of their profession, 
particularly underscored by the devastating COVID-19 pandemic. Nurses 
and their communities are reminded of their steadfast courage and 
unwavering commitment through these services.
  As we reflect on the profound impact of the Nurse Honor Guard of 
Saint Louis, we follow our pledge to honor the memory of our fallen 
nurses, support grieving families, and uphold the pride and dignity of 
the nursing profession with enduring gratitude. As a nurse and 
Congresswoman, I am honored to join our St. Louis community to commend 
the Nurse Honor Guard of Saint Louis and its members for their 
exemplary service.
I rise to recognize the Nations community 
supervision professionals, who are dedicated public servants and 
perform many vital roles in their work with justice-involved adults and 
juveniles. Community supervision professionals identify opportunities 
and services to help justice-involved individuals contribute to 
society, while holding them accountable for their actions. They remain 
mindful of their role in protecting public safety.
  In honor of Pretrial, Probation and Parole Supervision Week 2024, we 
salute all those who have chosen this important career. In the District 
of Columbia, we especially thank the employees of the Court Services 
and Offender Supervision Agency for the District of Columbia (CSOSA) 
and the Pretrial Services Agency for the District of Columbia (PSA) for 
their service. CSOSA and PSA are models of excellence in community 
supervision. The theme of Pretrial, Probation and Parole Supervision 
Week 2024 is ``Wellness Unveiled: Navigating the Journey.
  Community supervision agencies are valuable partners of other 
government agencies, nonprofits, neighborhood-based groups and all who 
strive to make our Nation safer and stronger. We extend out gratitude 
to community supervision professionals and encourage all people to 
recognize their many achievements as we proclaim July 21-27, 2024, as 
Pretrial, Probation and Parole Supervision Week 2024.
I rise to honor the second 
class of the Department of Homeland Securitys (DHS) Intelligence and 
Cybersecurity Diversity Fellowship (ICDF) Program. The ICDF Program 
intends to help DHS cultivate diverse talent to enter public service in 
Federal cybersecurity offices and components. This exemplary fellowship 
class is working across the homeland security enterprise--in DHS 
Headquarters, the Office of Intelligence and Analysts, Coast Guard, 
Secret Service, and Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency.
  This years class includes four returning fellows and eleven new 
fellows. They represent 10 States and hail from universities of all 
sizes. Six of this years class attend Historically Black Colleges and 
Universities, and three attend other Minority Serving Institutions. 
This talented class of fellows represents the diverse perspectives that 
are needed to help strengthen DHSs ability to analyze the evolving 
threats facing our Nation. I am proud that the fellowship program I 
passed through the House has provided pathways to success for each of 
these future homeland security leaders.
  Congratulations to Veronica Kyles, Christian Lopez, Erin Sullivan, 
Reyben Cortes, Kiara Kelly, Ariel Henderson, Ethan Polhemus, Sage 
Despignes, Sharanya Padithaya, Zaria Gibbs, Daryan Lassiter, Kamryn 
Brown, Shaqandra Roberson, Tori Johnson, and Kaari Harsila.
, I look forward to following their careers as they 
progress toward making our homeland even safer.
we are here today to honor the life of 
Leslie Kenneth Champney in recognition of his service in the United 
States Navy Reserve during the Second World War.
  Seaman First Class Leslie Champney served his country from September 
1, 1943 to May 25, 1946. While in enlisted in the US Navy Reserve, Mr. 
Champney served overseas as a security officer aboard the SS Charles J. 
Folger and the USS Barber for a total of twenty-three months, 
experiencing both the Atlantic and Pacific theaters of the war.
  Once while on a ship in the North Atlantic, Mr. Champney and his 
shipmates encountered a majestic whale, a memory he would often share 
with his children.
  Upon his return from service, Mr. Champney fathered seven children 
and worked hard as an automotive mechanic, primarily focused on diesel 
vehicles.
  Although he did not often speak of his time in the military, he 
deserves our gratitude and proper recognition for his contribution to 
the Allied victory in World War II.
  Today, we present the late Mr. Champneys son, Kenn, with the five 
medals his father earned through his service during World War II.
it is with great respect and admiration that 
I take this time to recognize Sandra Noe and to congratulate her on her 
retirement from her position as Chief Executive Officer of Meals on 
Wheels of Northwest Indiana. Sandras efforts to improve the quality-
of-life for the aging community and those faced with disabilities 
throughout Northwest Indiana make her worthy of the utmost praise and 
our sincere gratitude. For her 38 years of unwavering dedication to the 
organization, Sandra will be honored at a retirement celebration taking 
place on Friday, July 19, 2024.
  Since its humble beginnings in 1977, Meals on Wheels of Northwest 
Indiana has seen consistent growth, and its immense impact has been a 
source of pride throughout the community. During her illustrious 
tenure, Sandra has been instrumental in every aspect of the 
organization, from managing human resources to developing computer 
programs for food purchases and inventory control to assisting in a 
building expansion to construct two central kitchens. A testament to 
Sandras outstanding leadership, Meals on Wheels of Northwest Indiana 
now delivers more than 2,000 meals each day to children and adults 
throughout the region and recently reached an incredible milestone, 
having served its 9 millionth meal. Under Sandras direction, the 
organization has continued to thrive, and we as a community are truly 
grateful for her service.
  In addition to her impressive career, Sandra has dedicated much of 
her time to charitable endeavors and organizations throughout the 
region. She has served on advisory boards for the Indiana University 
Northwest School of Public and Environmental Affairs, the advisory 
committee for Northwest Indiana Community Action, and as a board member 
and finance committee member for Meals on Wheels America. Notably, 
Sandra is a proud founding member of the board of the 219 Health 
Network, and she was named the 2015 recipient of the Influential Woman 
of Northwest Indiana Women in Non-Profit Award by the Northwest Indiana 
Influential Women Association, a prestigious accolade befitting her 
noteworthy career.
, I ask that you and my other distinguished colleagues 
join me in recognizing the remarkable work of Meals on Wheels of 
Northwest Indiana and the lifetime of selfless service and tireless 
dedication of Sandra Noe. Her commitment to the Northwest Indiana 
community serves as an inspiration to us all, and we extend our best 
wishes upon her retirement in the years to come.
had I been present, I would have 
voted YEA on Roll Call No. 353; YEA on Roll Call No. 354; and YEA on 
Roll Call No. 355.
RECOGNIZING THE AUBURN MENS GOLF TEAMS NCAA DIVISION I NATIONAL TITLE
I rise today to recognize the 
Auburn University Mens Golf team for winning the NCAA Division I 
National Title.
  On May 29th, the Auburn Tigers held off Florida State University 
three matches to two to secure their title win. The tournament came 
down to the last match of the day and was finally won on the 17th hole 
with a par. The tournament was played at the Omni La Costa Resort in 
Carlsbad, California.
  This is the first national championship for the Auburn Mens Golf 
Team and advanced the team to 4-1 all-time in NCAA championship match 
play. Previously, the team had not advanced past a semifinal round.
, please join me in congratulating Coach Clinard, the 
Auburn University Mens Golf team, students, faculty, and all the fans. 
War Eagle.
I rise to celebrate and wish a very happy and 
special 100th birthday to World War II veteran Robert Bohyer.
  Robert embodies what it means to be a member of the ``Greatest 
Generation. When the forces of fascism threatened the peace, 
security, and freedom of millions upon millions, Robert answered the 
call to serve, joining the U.S. Army Air Corps--which later became the 
Air Force--when he was only 18 years old.

  As a B-17 tail gunner, Robert was assigned to the 486th Bombardment 
Group near Sudbury, England and then later to the 483rd Bombardment 
Group in Italy. All told, Robert flew 35 missions from England and 
Italy, and he faced down mortal danger with the kind of heroic courage 
and valor that we desperately need more of today. Robert succinctly 
captured the danger he confronted by saying ``We were shot up but never 
shot down. Robert distinguished himself in service, and he has the 
medals and citations to prove it.
  President Ronald Reagan reminded us that freedom is fragile and must 
constantly be fought for and guarded by each generation. That noble 
mission is exactly what Robert helped carry out when he wore the 
uniform of the United States Military. Because of the service and 
sacrifice of veterans, generations of Americans have been able to 
experience the blessings of liberty and live in a land that is free. 
For that, all of us owe Robert and his fellow veterans a debt that we 
can never fully repay.
  As Robert celebrates a century of life lived to the fullest, I join 
his family and countless Hoosiers in wishing Robert Bohyer a very Happy 
100th Birthday. I commend him for his loyal service to our Nation in 
uniform and the many great contributions he has made to our country. 
May God bless Robert.