today, we gather to honor and celebrate the 
remarkable contributions of Black women leaders in Houston--individuals 
who are not only trailblazers in their communities but also powerful 
forces in the world of entrepreneurship.
  These women are not just business owners--they are visionaries, 
building businesses that impact the very fabric of our city and our 
Nation.
  Linda K. Brown is the founder and chief executive officer of a broad-
based and full-service media communications agency, media/public 
relations, advertising and media placement, project management, event 
coordination and political consulting firm.
  Duni Hebron has led The Emerald Group for over 20 years with a focus 
on excellence and dynamic leadership. Under her guidance, the company 
has flourished, delivering innovative solutions and fostering 
sustainable growth for global clients.
  She also brings a wealth of experience as a real estate broker in 
both residential and commercial sales, further complementing her 
multifaceted professional portfolio.
  Dr. Janice M. Beal is a researcher, clinician, author, and behavioral 
expert. She provides direct leadership as President of Beal Counseling 
Associates, and Beal Behavioral Health.
  In 2020, she developed and implemented two Covid-19 crisis mental 
health hotlines/helplines. Throughout her twenty-eight plus years of 
professional experience she served as a clinician, treating the 
emotional needs of children and adolescents.
  Terri Hamm is the owner of Kindred Stories, a bookstore currently 
located in Third Ward, Houston, TX, committed to amplifying the voices 
of Black authors and artisans.
  Through Kindred Stories, Terri hopes to create a community-centered 
hub where the works of Black authors and artisans are accessible and 
celebrated.
  A. Renee Logans founded Houston-based ADSI in l990 where she has 
served as President and CEO.
  For over two decades, she has provided superior services to a range 
of clients in the technology and construction services arena within 
both the public and private sectors.
  Renees has always had an approach to create processes that aligns 
with technology needs for increased organizational efficiency.
  Renee has effectively led clients through transition periods 
resulting in significant improvements in reliability and profitability.
  Lastly, I would like to highlight Argentina M. James, president and 
CEO of HillDay Public Relations, Inc. and HillDay Industries, Inc., who 
has amassed nearly three decades of industry experience.
  Prior to starting HillDay, Argentina skillfully led all aspects of 
public relations efforts for private and public corporations.
, the future of Houston, and indeed of this Nation, is 
brighter because of the contributions of these incredible Black women.
  They are not just leaders in their businesses--they are leaders in 
our communities, our cities, and in the ongoing fight for equality, 
opportunity, and empowerment for all.
this past Friday I learned with great 
sadness about the passing of Senator Richard Colburn, a dedicated 
public servant and an Eastern Shore patriot who devoted his life to the 
service and betterment of the people of the State of Maryland.
  Senator Colburn and I served together in the Maryland State Senate. 
He arrived to the Maryland General Assembly first as a State Delegate 
about sixteen years prior to my being elected to the Maryland Senate in 
1999. By that time, Rich Colburn had already been serving as a State 
Senator for four years. He quickly became my mentor, dear colleague, 
and a trusted friend. For a period, Rich and I served on the Education, 
Health and Environmental Affairs Committee. As a devoted Eastern 
Shoreman and a son of a waterman, Senator Colburn knew how crucial it 
is for the government to be accountable, transparent, honest, and 
helpful to its citizens. As such, he made constituent casework and 
assisting his fellow Marylanders his top priroity.
  As a ``Shore Senator, Rich fought on behalf of his constituents 
with fervor and purpose. During his time in the legislature, he 
introduced hundreds of bills, at times reaching across the aisle to 
promote projects and priorities he believed would benefit the Shore. 
One of his greatest accomplishments was the multi-decade battle led to 
his securing over $60 million to replace the Dover Bridge; a vital 
artery connecting Southern Caroline and Talbot Counties on the Eastern 
Shore. The bridge finally opened in 2018 with great fanfare. Among his 
many other accomplishments was his success in the preservation of the 
Easton hospital, widening U.S. Route 50, increasing benefits for 
veterans and law enforcement, and obtaining funding for restoration of 
the Chesapeake Bays oyster population. He advocated for businesses and 
tourism on the Shore to lift and support the local economy by helping 
provide funding for the Choptank River Lighthouse and bringing in the 
Hyatt hotel to Cambridge, among others.
  Richard Franklin Colburn was born on February 9, 1950 and grew up in 
Oxford, Maryland. After graduating from the Easton High School, Rich 
served in the United States Army Security Agency posted in Germany 
during the height of the Cold War. He left after three years with the 
Army, achieving the rank of Sergeant. After his return to Maryland, he 
worked in private practice. He was elected to the House of Delegates in 
1983, where he served until 1991 before he ascended to the State Senate 
in 1995. Senator Colburn became the longest serving Republican Senator

in the Senate. After his service in elected office, he served as 
Special Assistant to Agriculture Secretary Joe Bartenfelder under 
Governor Larry Hogan. His district included the counties of Caroline, 
Dorchester, Talbot and Wicomico.
  Senator Richard Colburn passed away suddenly on Friday, December 27, 
2024, in Easton at the age of 74 years old. I would like to express my 
sincere condolences to his loving wife Alma, daughter Johanna Hamilton 
(Bobby), granddaughter Saylor and sister Marie, as well as the entire 
extended Colburn family and friends. The Eastern Shore is forever 
grateful for Senator Colburns commitment to service and his dedication 
to Maryland.
HONORING THE LIFE OF MARVIN REASER, Jr.
I rise to honor Mr. Marvin Dennis Reaser, 
Jr., who passed away on August 20 at the age of 84. Mr. Reaser was a 
talented musician and beloved band director whose career spanned over 
30 years in Salem, Virginia, most notably leaving a lasting impact on 
Salem High School.
28, 1940, in Nitro, West Virginia. His 
parents, Artie Lda Shomo and Marvin Dennis Reaser, Sr., raised him in 
St. Albans, West Virginia, with a very modest family lifestyle.
  Music remained a necessity for the Reaser household, with piano 
lessons being a requirement for Mr. Reaser, his sister, Sally, and his 
brother, David. During his tenure at St. Albans Jr. High, Mr. Reaser 
played in the High School Band, which was directed by Alan Farley. Mr. 
Farley saw something remarkable about Mr. Reasers musical ability and 
would not soon forget his four-year impact on the school.
He served for four years in the Navy, from Africa 
to Saudi Arabia, playing his trumpet for the Navy Band. Upon Mr. 
Reasers return from his service overseas, he landed two teaching jobs 
as band director for two different high schools, notably without a 
college degree--a testament to his skill and talent.
  By 1968, Mr. Reaser earned his undergraduate degree from Morris 
Harvey College (now University of Charleston) in Charleston, West 
Virginia. This same year, his former high school band director, Mr. 
Farley, who had been working at Andrew Lewis High School in Salem, VA, 
reached out to Mr. Reaser asking for him to apply to the Band Director 
job there. After landing the job one year later, Mr. Reaser joined a 
team that would shape his career for the next 30 years. With Mr. 
Reasers directing style closely mirroring what he had learned from the 
United States Navy, the award-winning Andrew Lewis High Band was widely 
known for their student-led governance with emphasis on excellence and 
hard work.
  When Andrew Lewis HS closed and its students were merged into Salem 
High School (Salem, VA), he became the band leader there.
, throughout his tenure as a band director, participated in 
a number of complementary pursuits, such as playing trumpet for gigs in 
the surrounding areas of Southwest Virginia, authoring a book, and even 
earning his masters degree in music composition from Radford 
University.
  In 2001, Mr. Reaser earned a key to the city from the Salem City 
Council, marking his retirement from Salem City Schools on a day that 
was dubbed ``Dennis Reaser Day by the City of Salem. However, he knew 
he had more to teach and went on to work as a band director for the 
Hargrave Military Academy for three years and then assistant principal 
for First Flight High School for over 10 years.
2015 and spent the remainder of his 
life composing and arranging music, playing in community bands and 
surrounding himself with his family and friends. Mr. Reaser 
unfortunately was diagnosed with Parkinsons Disease in his final seven 
years, but always stayed ahead of his disease, averaging five to ten 
thousand steps per day instead of allowing the symptoms to overcome 
him.
  While I was never a member of the Andrew Lewis High School marching 
band as a student there, I was proud to know Mr. Reaser and admired his 
work both with the marching band and all the other programs, 
particularly the annual Opus.
, Jr. was a true example of someone who 
delivers excellence to communities with his passion for music. He will 
be remembered for his outstanding work as a teacher, a veteran, and 
family man.
HONORING THE LIFE OF WORLEY ``SKIP BISHOP, Jr.
I rise in honor of Worley ``Skip Bishop, 
Jr., who passed away on September 7th, at the age of 83. Mr. Bishop 
dedicated his life to his family, students, and the community of Floyd, 
Virginia.
  Worley ``Skip Bishop Jr. was born on October 14, 1940, to Worley S. 
``Sam Bishop, Sr. and Estella ``Jackie Bishop. He was a natural 
athlete and excelled at playing baseball, basketball, and golf.
  Skip had a big heart for his home in Floyd, Virginia. He served as 
Mayor for nearly two decades and was determined to make Floyd a 
vibrant, thriving community.
  He taught at Floyd County High School, in Floyd, Virginia and deeply 
cared for his students and athletes.
  He coached for 35 years earning various accolades including: District 
Golf Coach of the Year six times; District Baseball Coach of the Year 
four times; Timberland Golf Coach of the Year four times; State 
Basketball Coach of the Year in 1985. Under his direction, Floyd County 
Basketball was the State Runner Up in 1987, and the Floyd County High 
School Golf team became State Champions in 2000, 2001, 2006, and 2007.
  Skips greatest love was his family and was proud to be known as Dad 
and Papa. His marriage to Martha Ann Bass Bishop for 59 years, produced 
loving and joyful, as they shared two children, four grandchildren, and 
six great-grandchildren.
  He leaves behind his loving wife, Martha; daughter, Sandra ``Sandi 
Bishop Smith; son, Michael ``Mike (Jessica) Bishop; grandchildren, 
Stefan ``Sam (Michaela) Bishop, Sydney Smith, Joel ``Max (Hailey) 
Bishop and Sloan Smith; great-grandchildren, Sofia, Daisy, Killian, 
Echo, Revan and Fox Bishop; his dearly loved sister, Loretta (Jack) 
Bishop Hicks; and many beloved cousins and friends.
  Skip is preceded in death by his father, Worley S. ``Sam Bishop, 
Sr.; his mother, Estella ``Jackie Bishop; his granddaughter, Sawyer 
Lynn Smith; and many beloved cousins and friends.
  Worley ``Skip Bishop, Jr. was larger than life. Whether you called 
him Skip, Dad, Papa, or Coach, he is dearly missed and remembered by 
all who knew him, and especially in Floyd County, Virginia.
I rise today to honor three remarkable educators from 
the 18th Congressional District of Texas whose dedication and impact 
inspire students and strengthen our community.
  From KIPP Texas-Houston who serve over 21,000 students, I would like 
to recognize:
  Caleb Thomas, a third-grade math teacher, engages students with 
hands-on activities and real-world connections, igniting a love for 
learning.
  His teaching philosophy centers on creating an engaging and inclusive 
learning environment that ignites a passion for learning.
  He prioritizes student engagement through a blend of hands-on 
activities, technology, and real-world connections, ensuring that 
learning is not only enjoyable but also impactful.
.
  She leads through her strong belief in foundational literacy and 
numeracy and believes deeply that students must craft their own 
narrative through a rich understanding of themselves and their culture.
  Dr. Khalilah Campbell-Rhone, Deputy Superintendent of Transformation, 
has transformed underperforming school into thriving educational hubs, 
leaving a lasting legacy.
  She has also turned around campuses in Houston ISD including Sam 
Houston High School, Thomas Middle School, Worthing High School, and 
Wheatley High School.
  These educators remind us that teaching is not just a profession, but 
a calling to shape future generations.
  Their unwavering commitment to excellence deserves our gratitude and 
continued support.
  I thank these educators for their tireless dedication to our children 
and communities.