I rise today to honor a great American and an 
exceptional leader in our U.S. Navy.
  Commander Bruce Kimbrell has distinguished himself through his 
professional character and dedication by serving this Nation in 
uniform. For the past year, Commander Kimbrell served admirably as the 
Department of Defense Legislative Fellow for my office where he handled 
House Armed Service Committee hearing preparation and execution while 
also contributing to my work on with the House Foreign Affairs 
Committee, and House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence. Above 
all, he was the driving force behind my Maritime policy portfolio via 
multiple, pieces of maritime legislation, congressional letters, as 
well as multiple Maritime Statecraft engagements with representatives 
from the Secretary of the Navy, Chief of Naval Operations, Maritime 
Administrator, and an extensive executive list of Maritime industry 
stakeholders involved in carrying out maritime statecraft activities 
and national maritime strategy.
  His efforts advanced a shared effort for reinvigorating our Nations 
maritime sector and gaining greater insight into the tools available 
for helping create a more favorable global environment for advancing 
Americas maritime power.
  Commander Kimbrell has had a remarkable twenty-two-year career after 
enlisting into the U.S. Navy in 2002, graduating from the University of 
Massachusetts in 2011, and commissioning as an Ensign designated as an 
Intelligence Officer. He served aboard two aircraft carriers, an 
amphibious war ship, as well as temporary duties aboard the NATO Afloat 
Standing Maritime Group Flag Ship. Later, he won the 2017 RADM Thomas A 
Brooks Junior Officer of the Year for the Naval Intelligence Community 
Award while assigned to Carrier Air Wing THREE. He also served as the 
.S. FIFTH Fleet during which he was designated as a member 
of the Military Top 40 Under 40 in 2017 by Recruit Military, Bradley 
Morris, Inc. In addition, he served as the Executive Assistance to the 
Director Maritime Operations as U.S. Pacific Fleet prior to his role as 
Special Advisor to the Chief of Naval Operations on force design, 
strategic planning, ally and partner interoperability, and strategic 
risk.
  The Secretary of the Navy was impressed enough by his legislative 
work and especially in his creation of the maritime task force that he 
selected Commander Kimbrell to serve as his Special Advisor in which he 
advised the Secretary on maritime policy at the intersection of 
industry, government agencies, strategic think tanks, maritime advocacy 
groups, and U.S. Congress. His efforts led to the second annual 
Maritime Statecraft Innovation workshop sponsored by the Secretary of 
the Navy and Maritime Administration.
, next month Commander Kimbrell will assume duties as the 
. It has been a great pleasure to work with Commander 
Kimbrell during his time representing the Department of Defense in my 
office on Capitol Hill. On behalf of our grateful Nation, it is my 
honor to recognize the selfless service and sacrifice of Commander 
Kimbrell and his four children. I wish them the very best as they 
continue their journey in our U.S. Navy. They have dedicated their 
lives to the service of our great Nation.
I rise today to celebrate an 
incredible New Orleans Matriarch, former State Senator Diana Bajoie. 
She is one for the history books. As a young woman in her twenties, she 
began her public service in the Louisiana House of Representatives, 
where she served as the only woman in that body during her first term. 
In 1991, she became the first African American woman ever elected to 
the Louisiana State Senate. In 2004, she took the oath as Senate 
President pro-tempore, and became the first woman ever elected to a 
leadership post in the Louisiana State Senate. In 2012, Senator Bajoie 
was appointed by Mayor Landrieu to fill a vacancy on the New Orleans 
City Council in District B.
  Former Senator Diana E. Bajoie is not just a public servant in 
title--she is a public servant in spirit, heart, and deeds. Her 
colleagues describe her as one who fights for communities, families, 
and Louisiana with tireless compassion. The Senator nurtured her early 
interest in community service by attending Southern University and A&amp;M 
College in Baton Rouge, earning a bachelors degree in political 
science. She also attended the Southern University School of Law. An 
Honorary Doctor of Humane Letters Degree was conferred upon former 
Senator Diana E. Bajoie at their Fall 2018 Commencement. The University 
recognized the Senator as a pioneer in state politics and acknowledged 
the many contributions and efforts in improving the quality of life for 
all.
  Former Senator Diana E. Bajoie is a part-time member of the staff of 
LSU Health Sciences Center New Orleans as Director of Community 
Relations. She works with LSU Health Sciences Centers six schools to 
define and implement community relations programs and work to promote 
cultural diversity among faculty, staff, and students.
  As a State Legislator, Ms. Bajoie served as Vice Chair of the Finance 
Committee that handled the operating budget for the State of Louisiana. 
At that time, the operating budget was over several billion dollars. 
Her health care experience is extensive. She was a ranking member of 
the Health and Welfare Committee where she served for over 25 years 
between the House and the Senate.
  She led the efforts to create school-based health clinics and wrote 
legislation to provide breast cancer screening and treatment for low 
income and uninsured women, mandated coverage of mammography and other 
cancer screening tests, and increase health care coverage for citizens 
with mental health disorders. She sponsored legislation that created 
the Louisiana Cancer Research Center in New Orleans, The Metropolitan 
Human Services District that services Orleans, St. Bernard, and 
Plaquemines Parishes to treat vulnerable residents for mental illness, 
addictive disorder intellectual and or developmental disabilities and 
she also created The Minority Health Care Commission.
  She worked to ensure recognition of the contributions of African 
Americans to New Orleans, Louisiana, and the nation. Her efforts 
resulted in legislation to create the Louisiana State Museum on Civil 
Rights, that has finally come to fruition in 2023, and the expansion 
and renaming of the New Orleans Convention Center in honor of the 
citys first African American Mayor, ``The Ernest N. Morial Convention 
Center. Bajoie introduced the Civil Rights Museum legislation during 
the Governor Foster administration.
  Governor Murphy James Foster Jr. was Louisianas 53rd governor. His 
grandfather, Murphy J. Foster Sr., the 31st Louisiana governor, 
supported the 1898 Louisiana Constitution, which disfranchised the 
Black majority. Murphy Jr.s conservative platform included attacks on 
welfare abuse, gun control, affirmative action, and racial quotas 
during the era of affirmative action. Undeterred by Fosters position, 
every year, Bajoie ensured ``something was put in the state budget 
for the Civil Rights Museum.
  During speaking engagements, Bajoie credits Hassan Haley (son of 
Oretha Castle Haley and Richard Haley), Don Hubbard and Loyce Wright 
for keeping the dream of the museum alive. ``I also want to thank 
Lieutenant Nungesser. We need people to keep the fight going because 
were just beginning. We want to make sure we tell our own story. Its 
taken a long time. Its like making gumbo. If you go too fast, it wont 
come out right. She continues to express a need to focus on raising 
more money to keep the museum going. The Civil Rights Museum will be 
permanently housed on this property.
a founder and former chair of the Louisiana Legislative 
Black Caucus and the Louisiana Legislative Womens Caucus. She also is 
a founder and served as President of the National Organization of Black 
Elected Legislative Women, a national legislative womens organization 
which encourages and supports women in public and community service. 
She also served on the Louisiana Recovery Authority Board helping to 
rebuild the state after the devastating disasters of Hurricanes Katrina 
and Rita.
  Outside of state politics, Ms. Bajoie has been involved in a myriad 
of civic organizations where she served as a Trustee for the National 
World War II Museum, a member of the WYES-TV Board of Directors, Xavier 
University of Louisiana Board of Visitors and Dillard University 
Advisory Board.
  The Former Senator presently serve as a commissioner on the board of 
the New Orleans East Hospital, the National Organization of Black Women 
Legislators, LePetit Theater, and Mercy Endeavor Senior Center, just to 
name a few.
  She is a Life Member of the Southern University Alumni Federation and 
a Diamond Life Member of Delta Sigma Theta Sorority, Inc. She has 
received numerous awards, including the City of New Orleans Mayor 
Morial Medal of Honor. Former Sen. Bajoie was named the Susan G. Komen 
Breast Cancer Survivor of the Year in 2000. She was honored at the 
Delta Sigma Thetas 48th National Convention with the National Patricia 
Harris Award for Excellence in Government. She was inducted into the 
Louisiana Political Hall of Fame in 2007 and was later honored in 2010 
by The Louisiana Center for Women in Government with its Lifetime 
Achievement Award. She was also named by the New Orleans Tribune as one 
of 18 Black Women ``That Made New Orleans Better, who changed the 
City in the last 300 years. Mayor Landrieu named the former Senator a 
New Orleans Legend in honor of the citys Tricentennial.
  Last, but certainly not least, Sen. Diana E. Bajoie is a mentor--a 
mentor to students, to young people and families across the state 
striving to better themselves, their communities and Louisiana. She 
frequently shares her experiences and ideas in the classroom as well as 
with civic organizations and leadership development programs.

  The former Senator Bajoie legacy has spanned over three decades, she 
has fearlessly opened doors, not for herself but for others. Her work 
paves the way for young people to grow and build a better Louisiana. 
This shall be her Legacy.
  On a personal note, I am honored to have served alongside Former 
Senator Diana Bajoie, as a true mentor, supporter, and dear friend. She 
is a true fighter--as a ``lioness at heart, but Don Hubbard calls her 
``killer. The Greater New Orleans Community is blessed to have this 
incredible gem still making a difference in our great state. I am proud 
to say I can connect with her throughout my political career, and as 
Congressman, respecting the guidance and support she gives. I am 
forever grateful for her commitment to the residents of Louisiana, and 
guidance to our program. I will forever carry her direction as I serve 
the Constituents of LA02. May God continue to bless her.
I rise today to recognize New 
Orleans beloved native daughter, a true friend, mentor and confidant 
to many, and most notably, a Civil Rights Pioneer of the New Orleans 
Public School Desegregation--The New Orleans Four, Tessie Nelda 
Prevost-Williams. She was born Tessie Nelda Prevost at Charity Hospital 
on September 26, 1954. She passed away surrounded by her immediate 
family and loved ones on Saturday July 6, 2024, at the age of 69. She 
is survived by her mother Dorothy Mackey Prevost (93), her sister Tory 
Prevost (DWayne Hulbert), and her lifelong friends, Civil Rights 
Pioneers Gail Etienne and Leona Tate. She was preceded in death by her 
father Charles Henry Prevost, Jr., and her husband Dwight Williams.
  She was a life member of Branch Bell Baptist Church, located in the 
Lower Ninth Ward of New Orleans, Louisiana, christened, baptized and 
later joined in holy matrimony on October 20, 1984, to the late Dwight 
Williams at that location. She was an active member in the church from 
a very young age, from serving as president of the Youth Usher Board to 
serving as President of the Senior Usher Board. Always on program at 
church, speaking and performing, she was a spirited child who was loved 
and known by many.
  Tessie Prevost is most noted as one of four 6-year-old girls who 
became the first African Americans to desegregate formerly white only 
public elementary schools in New Orleans and the Deep South. On 
November 14, 1960, with world-wide attention set on the city of New 
Orleans, Ruby Bridges, Gail Etienne, Tessie Prevost, and Leona Tate 
(The New Orleans Four) escorted by U.S. Federal Marshals wearing yellow 
armbands desegregated two schools. Three of the girls (Gail Etienne, 
Tessie Prevost, and Leona Tate) enrolled at McDonogh 19 elementary 
school located at 5909 St. Claude Ave. The fourth girl (Ruby Bridges) 
enrolled at William Frantz elementary school located at 3811 N. Galvez 
St. As Americas Little Soldier Girls, they played an integral and 
pivotal role in the Civil Rights Movement sparking the inspiration for 
the Childrens Crusade of 1963.
  After McDonogh 19 became predominantly black, Tessie, Gail and Leona 
along with 8 other students desegregated another formerly white only 
public elementary school in the Lower Ninth Ward Thomas Jefferson 
Semmes, where they endured violent, horrifying and dehumanizing 
treatment from white teachers, students and cafeteria workers who spit 
in their food and at times refused to serve them.
  After successfully desegregating TJ Semmes and completing 6th grade, 
Tessies parents enrolled her at Rivers Frederick Junior High School, 
where she found music. She learned to play the flute and joined the 
marching band. Tessie remained in predominantly Black schools 
continuing her education at Joseph S. Clark Senior High School. There, 
she also played in the Joseph S. Clark Marching Band. Following high 
school, she attended the University of New Orleans and University of 
Southeastern Louisiana focusing her studies on education and history. 
She stayed active in community civic engagement to make things better 
for her people and served as a member of Women for Progressive Action, 
where she would encourage her community to register to vote.
  As a professional, Tessie was employed by the U.S. Postal Service for 
several years, but she answered her call to work in education and 
community. Her proud moments were supporting young kids and families 
who didnt have dental Insurance when she first started working at 
Louisiana State University Health Science Center in the Department of 
Pediatric Dentistry. She later became an assistant to Professors in the 
Biochemistry Department where she prepared syllabi for the Ph.D. 
program at LSU School of Dentistry. After 27 years of service, she 
retired in 2017.
  In celebration of the 60th Anniversary of school desegregation, then 
N. O. Councilperson Cyndi Nguyen brought forth the resolution to honor 
Tessie Prevost, Gail Etienne, Leona Tate, and Ruby Bridges recognizing 
November 14th and New Orleans Four Day. The City Council of New Orleans 
voted Yes unanimously. On November 14, 2020, the City Council of New 
Orleans and the office of Mayor LaToya Cantrell hosted a special 
Proclamation Day Ceremony at Gather Hall to commemorate the 60th 
Anniversary proclaiming November 14th forever New Orleans Four Day On 
that day, all four Civil Rights Pioneers were honored equivalently and 
each of them were given a Proclamation Finally, after 60 years, they 
each received the Key to The City from the office of Mayor LaToya 
Cantrell.
  Following the Gallier Hall celebration, the members of The New 
Orleans Four started receiving national recognition and accolades due 
to the work of various media industry professionals, elected officials 
and Black women in corporate executive leadership. The multi-media 
project called The New Orleans Legacy Project, collaborated inducting 
The New Orleans Four into ``Voices of The Civil Rights Movement. 
Their Interview segments garnered over one million views across the 
entire Comcast/NBCUniversal and NBC platforms.
  As a result, Tessie Prevost, Leona Tate, and Gail Etienne appeared in 
their first national network television interview on the Today Show 
with Rhema Ellis reporting from New Orleans. This news feature exposed 
the untold story about Tessie Prevost, Leona Tate and Gail Etienne and 
catapulted the three members of The New Orleans Four to equivalent 
recognition and honor to Ruby Bridges for their sacrifice and courage. 
For decades as hidden figures, they endured dehumanizing degradation 
and felt the world and America forgot about them.
  Following the Today Show news feature, the Civil Rights Pioneers 
received their first national award during the 2022 Essence Festival of 
Culture Dove/Unilever Crown Awards held July 2, 2022, honored the 
members of The New Orleans Four with the Living Legend Award. On August 
6, 2022, the Urban League of Louisiana honored the three hidden figures 
as notable Changemakers Tessie, Leona, and Gails story moved many to 
recognize the importance of fact checking.
  The following year, they garnered more local and national news 
features like the 2023 CBS News Black History Month feature by reporter 
Jamie Wax which highlighted the untold story of The New Orleans Four 
helping to raise more awareness about the illegitimate revision of the 
accurate historical record. Now, America and the world have been 
reinspired by the powerful courage of The New Orleans Four who rocked 
the Nation and changed the world.
  In October 2023, at 69 years of age, Tessie became Chief Operating 
Officer of her own company, New Orleans Four, LLC., partnering with her 
childhood friend and fellow classmate, Gail Etienne who serves as Chief 
Executive Officer. Ms. Prevost and Ms. Etienne committed themselves to 
preserving and protecting the history and legacy of The New Orleans 
Four. Before her passing, Tessie and Gail partnered with the industry 
professionals who paid it forward to ensure that the story of The New 
Orleans Four would never be lost in history again They planned to 
release a host of projects with the launch of The New Orleans Four 
Legacy Collection and their Serving Black Girl Magic Since 1960 brand 
and initiative.
  Tessie Prevost, a child soldier, a civil rights pioneer, an activist 
for justice and a businesswoman and entrepreneur, profoundly stressed a 
quality and equitable education as the key to success and achievements 
``Education unleashes the past and paves the path of the future.
  In November 2023, as part of the 50th Anniversary of Bayou Classic, 
the Southern University Law Center at the Louis A. Berry Institute for 
Civil Rights &amp; Justice presented and honored the members of The New 
Orleans Four during the Southern University convening of the Board of 
Directors. Civil Rights Pioneers Tessie Prevost, Gail Etienne and Leona 
Tate were honorary Marshals in the Bayou Classic Parade. The ladies 
received joyous shouts of thank you from parade goers State 
Representative Alonzo Knox petitioned Governor John Bel Edwards to sign 
an official statement. In November, for their 63rd anniversary, the 
Governor signed the official statement in support of the City Council 
of New Orleans proclaiming November 14th--New Orleans Four Day.
  On May 14, 2024, Tessie Prevost, Gail Etienne, and Leona Tate were 
invited to be

honored by the United States Department of Justice Civil Rights 
Division and the United States Department of Education Office of Civil 
Rights for the 70th Anniversary of Brown v Board. All three of them 
were slated to fly to Washington D.C. to be honored by Attorney General 
Merrick B Garland, and Secretary of Education Miquel Cardona. Due to 
her illness, Tessie was unable to fly with Gail and Leona. These women 
joined Assistant Attorney General for a fireside chat, and they shared 
the platform with other powerful notables like Assistant Secretary for 
Civil Rights Catherine E. Lhamon, President &amp; Director-Counsel of the 
NAACP Legal Defense Fund Janai Nelson, and Saba Bireda, Co-founder, and 
Chief Legal Counsel of Browns Promise.
  Before her illness, she continued to lend herself in service to the 
community of LaPlace, Louisiana and New Orleans with hopes that by 
sharing their story and school experiences, she will inspire the next 
generation to pick up the torch to protect and continue the movement 
toward equitable opportunities and racial harmony. Ms. Prevost lived in 
LaPlace, Louisiana, as a faithful member of Rising Star Baptist Church 
and a former president of the usher board at Blanch Bell Baptist 
Church.
  She is also survived by her niece Deja Hulbert, nephew Derius 
Hulbert, her godchild, Ahtika Monique Merricks, her cousin, who was 
like a sister, Sharon Merricks, sister-laws, Dorothy Williams Grimble, 
Shirley Williams and Brenda Brock Williams, as well as a host of and 
friends. She was loved and adored by her late grandmothers, Dora 
Prevost, and Arie Ruth Mackey.
  I am so blessed and grateful to have known this phenomenal woman, a 
real trailblazer, leader and my true friend. May her story forever 
remain in the history books for everyone across the world.
I rise today to honor Dixon 
Family Services as they celebrate their 40th year of service.
  Established in 1984, Dixon Family Services is a community-based 
organization that offers intervention and support services. Cooperating 
with local schools, churches, businesses, and community members, Dixon 
Family Services assists residents in the pursuit of goals such as 
financial stability, improved or increased employment, escape from 
domestic violence, household budgeting, improved nutrition, and 
emotional wellness.
  Dixon Family Services maintains the Dixon Family Services Food 
Pantry, which helps combat food insecurity in local households. Dixon 
Family Service also acts as a bridge between residents and larger 
health care and governmental programs, ensuring that the local 
population is aware of and able to use resources that they may have 
otherwise overlooked or struggled to access.
  During the COVID-19 pandemic, our communitys need for human services 
dramatically increased. Answering this need, the dedicated staff of 
Dixon Family Services ensured that the organization safely remained 
open. Because of their compassion and commitment, Dixon Family Services 
was able to continue to provide vital information and referral services 
to clients even during the depths of the pandemic.
  Dixon Family Services uplifts members of our community, providing 
future opportunities for all. Over the past 40 years, Dixon Family 
Services has welcomed numerous college intern therapists, case 
managers, and clerical

and administrative staff, who were able to gain invaluable experience 
in the organization prior to moving on to other important positions or 
launching private practices in social work. Additionally, many of the 
clients Dixon Family Services provides resources to have gone on to 
make their own contributions to the community, paying forward the same 
assistance that they received.
  Although, historically, many of its programs were funded by 
government contracts or grants, in recent years Dixon Family Services 
has been supported primarily by private foundations, corporations, 
churches, service organizations, and businesses, as well as many caring 
and generous community members whose donations and kind words of 
support sustained the organization.
, during these last 40 years Dixon Family Services has 
consistently upheld a devotion to the highest ideals of community 
service. It is therefore fitting and proper that we honor Dixon Family 
Services outstanding work by and for our Dixon community, and its 40th 
year of service.
I rise today to recognize the astounding 
life of Dorothy Lawrence, who celebrates her 95th birthday this week.
  Dorothy was born on July 29, 1929, along with her twin brother Dick, 
on the Borden Farm in Wallkill, NY. She is the youngest of five 
children and spent her childhood on Borden Farms in Wallkill and 
Earlville NY, which her father managed. In 1947, she graduated from 
Earlville High School. The following year, Dorothy earned a business 
certification from the Central City Business Institute in Syracuse, New 
York. She worked as a secretary until she married her beloved husband, 
John, in 1955.
  Dorothy is a lifelong member of St. Malachys Catholic Church in 
Sherburne, New York. Coming from a musical family, Dorothy has had a 
passion for singing all her life. When she was only four years old she 
and her twin brother sang ``Little Old Lady Passing By for a radio 
contest. In the 1960s, she helped found the Sherburne Community Chorus 
and was an active member until just recently. At the age of 95, Dorothy 
still enjoys music, attending local concerts whenever possible.
  Currently, Dorothy still resides in the same house that she and her 
husband built in 1955. She is a loving mother to four children with 
whom she spends time with nearly every day. She has ten grandchildren 
and seven great-grandchildren who she loves dearly, and she keeps 
informed about her many nieces and nephews as well. Dorothy is one of 
four surviving members of her high school class, and she has remained 
in contact with each of her former classmates since they graduated 
together in 1947. Dorothy is known by her family, friends, and other 
members of her community for her delicious apple pie.
  Dorothy Lawrence is an exceptional member of her community whose 
dedication and love for her family and community is truly inspiring. I 
am thrilled to recognize her for her many accomplishments and wish her 
a very happy 95th birthday.
I rise to thank Mission Viejo 
City Manager, Dennis Wilberg, for his decades of service to our Mission 
Viejo community and to Orange County.
  His work in the public and private sectors of civil and 
transportation engineering, including 20 years as City Manager, has 
left an enormous impact across Mission Viejo and the County.
  From helping create the second-largest animal shelter in Orange 
County and building a water treatment facility, to increasing public 
safety and maintaining the Citys transportation network, theres no 
question how he has become the longest-tenured city manager in Orange 
County.
  I thank Dennis for his dedication to keeping our communities safe and 
connected.
  We are grateful for his leadership, and I wish him a wonderful 
retirement.
on Monday, July 22, 2024, I missed one Roll 
Call vote. Had I been present, I would have voted YES on Roll Call No. 
356.
I rise to voice my opposition to the 
speech given in this chamber by Israeli Prime Minister, Binyamin 
Netanyahu. The speech given by the Prime Minister was outrageous. He 
disrespected his role as a foreign leader speaking before a joint 
session of Congress. He used the floor of the U.S. House of 
Representatives to make blatantly political attacks on American 
citizens who disagree with his policies. He also made a full 
endorsement of former President Trump. One wonders if the Prime 
Ministers attacks were an attempt to salvage his own political 
survival in Israel by making it appear that he has the full support of 
the American people, which he does not.
  This was a disturbing day for many Americans and a tragic day for 
Israelis and Palestinians who are desperately looking for leadership--
not political grandstanding. What the American people want, and what 
Prime Minister Netanyahu failed to deliver, was a clear plan to end the 
violence and bring about a lasting two state solution in the region.
I rise today to recognize Ms. Josayne 
Anderson-Tejera, for receiving the Presidents Volunteer Service Award, 
an honor bestowed by the President of the United States to recognize 
the invaluable contributions of volunteers in our Nation. Over the 
course of her career, Josayne has demonstrated a steadfast commitment 
to making a difference in her community, specifically in the areas of 
civil rights and womens advocacy.
  Josayne was driven to a career in public service after she lost a 
close friend to domestic violence. Coupled with her own experiences 
surviving domestic violence, she has since dedicated her life to 
speaking out against domestic and sexual violence. In 2004, she founded 
the Love Quest Foundation, an organization that seeks to provide a safe 
space for young adults and survivors of domestic violence to learn 
healthy relationship habits and heal from trauma. Over the past 2 
decades, the Love Quest Foundation has transformed the lives of 
countless young people and survivors across Dutchess County.
  In addition to her work with her foundation, Ms. Anderson-Tetera has 
served as Dutchess Countys Equal Opportunity and Inclusion Officer 
since 2020. In her position, Josayne is charged with maintaining and 
improving the Countys commitments to diversity, equity, and inclusion. 
Previously, she worked for the New York State Department of Corrections 
and Community Supervision where she conducted investigations which 
aimed to prevent discrimination, misconduct, and assaults in the 
workplace. She has also served as: Financial Secretary and recruitment 
presenter for the New York State Minorities in Criminal Justice, Board 
Member for Life Flows Through Every Body, and Fellow for CEO Action for 
Racial Equity.
  I commend Josaynes impressive contributions to the Hudson Valley. 
Through her work, she has undoubtedly made a positive impact on the 
lives of countless men and women, The Presidents Volunteer Service 
Award is a formal acknowledgment of the hundreds of hours she has 
devoted to improving her community, but I want to take this opportunity 
to attest to the immeasurable contributions that she has selflessly 
made to Dutchess County and to our state.
I rise today with immense 
pride to acknowledge a standout business from our community that has 
been honored with the 2024 National Small Business Week Award, Quapaw 
Canoe Company. This recognition is a testament to the exceptional 
contributions of John Ruskey and his team, whose dedication has not 
only enhanced our local economy but also enriched the cultural and 
environmental landscape of our region.
  Quapaw Canoe Company, founded by John Ruskey, provides guiding and 
outfitting on the biggest river in North America, the mighty 
Mississippi River. They have been making a significant impact for about 
26 years. By offering guided canoe tours and educational programs on 
the Mississippi River, they have created opportunities for people to 
connect with nature, learn about out history, and appreciate

the beauty of the river that has shaped our community.
  What sets Quapaw Canoe Company apart is their unwavering commitment 
to environmental conservation and cultural preservation. Their work 
goes beyond simply providing recreational activities; it involves a 
deep respect for the rivers ecosystem and a passion for sharing the 
rich stories of our past. Through their efforts, they have fostered a 
greater appreciation for the Mississippi River and have played a 
crucial role in maintaining its natural beauty for future generations.
  During the challenges of the past few years, Quapaw Canoe Company has 
demonstrated remarkable resilience and innovation. They adapted their 
business practices to meet new demands and continued to serve our 
community with dedication and excellence. This ability to overcome 
obstacles and continue to thrive is a true reflection of the spirit of 
entrepreneurship.
  As we celebrate their accomplishment, it is fitting that we recognize 
Quapaw Canoe Company for their outstanding achievements. John Ruskey 
and his team are deserving of this honor, and their success serves as 
an inspiration to us all.
  Please join me in extending heartfelt congratulations to Quapaw Canoe 
Company for this prestigious award. Their contributions to our 
community and their dedication to their mission are truly commendable.