I rise today to ask my colleagues to 
join me in congratulating Timberland High Schools Emilia Labruyere on 
her victory in Missouris Class 5 Discus State Championship.
  Emilia claimed the Class 5 title, becoming the Wolves first female 
track and field state champion. Her incredible, winning throw of 42.14 
meters matched both her personal best and school record-winning toss of 
the same distance a month prior. Emilia should be commended for all her 
hard work throughout the past year and for bringing home the state 
championship to her school and community.
, please join me in recognizing Emilia Labruyere for a job 
well done.
I rise today to honor an incredible woman by 
the name of Emma Kenner. Emma Kenner is a child of God, and she gives 
thanks and praises to our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ.
  Emma was a Queens native hailing from Jamacia, New York. An 
inspirational and dedicated 103-year-old constituent who has had a 
major impact on the district. She has spent decades serving the 
communities of Southeast Queens as a shining example to future 
community leaders.
  Emma has a lengthy resume with accomplishments across a plethora of 
fields. She spent many years working at the New York State Department 
of Mental Hygiene, served as a coordinator of the New York Board of 
Elections, and was the former president of the 113th Police Precinct 
Council. She has also played a major role in New Yorks political field 
by volunteering at many local elected officials offices such as 
Senator Comrie, Floyd Flake, Archie Spigner, and my very own. A woman 
undoubtedly devoted to public service and the advancement of our 
communities.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in recognizing Emma 
Kenner for her dedication to politics, her city, and her community.
E. DeVOLL, SR.
I rise today to honor the memory of Lance 
Corporal (ret.) John E. DeVoll, Sr., of New Paltz, N.Y., a devoted 
partner; beloved father, grandfather, and uncle; proud U.S. Marine and 
Vietnam War Era veteran; and cherished friend, who passed away in 
Poughkeepsie, New York, on December 5, 2022.
  John DeVoll was born on November 30, 1944, in Staten Island, N.Y., to 
the late John ``Jack and Agnes (Bennett) DeVoll. He worked in 
security for Iron Mountain. Previously he worked as a night manager at 
Shoprite and manager at the International Pancake House, and worked 
with his parents in their family restaurants, Cherris I and II, in 
High Falls, N.Y.
  Lance Corporal DeVoll was a U.S. Marine who served his country with 
the 1st Battalion, 28th Marines, 5th Marine Division, 5th Marine 
Division (Fleet Marine Force) during the Vietnam War. For his service, 
he received awards including two Good Conduct Medals, the National 
Defense Service Medal, and the Rifle Sharpshooter Badge (M-14 Rifle). 
LCPL DeVoll was a selfless and faithful patriot.
  He was preceded in death by his parents, sisters Margaret Brandow, 
Barbara Hasbrouck, and Jacqueline Santowski, former wife Dorothy 
DeVoll, longtime companion Katherine Wagner, and stepson Billy Jo.
  He is survived by his children John Jr., Melissa Jennifer and her 
husband Rasheed Sr., and Michael; stepchildren Coleen and her husband 
Joseph Sr., and Kathy; grandchildren Anthony, Nicholas, Ava, Rasheed 
Jr., Ramya, Joe Jr., Damyn, Kaitlyn, Kaylona, Jerome, Christopher, 
Brittany Johnathan and Miranda. He will also be missed by many nieces 
and nephews.
, I ask my colleagues in the House of Representatives to 
join me in recognizing the accomplishments and legacy of Lance Corporal 
(ret.) John E. DeVoll. It is my privilege to rise in recognition of his 
service and to honor his memory.
on May 6 our North Texas community was left 
scarred by the shooting at Allen Premium Outlets.
  Nine people were killed, and 7 others were injured.
  But today, I recognize the brave story of the service of Gicela 
Aleman.
  An unsung hero who that day was shopping for new shoes at the outlet 
mall with her daughter, Adele.
  When the gunman opened fire, he severely wounded Preeti Patel, a 
mother and grandmother who was visiting family in North Texas and like 
so many others--was just trying to do some shopping.
  Amidst the chaos and violence, Gicela sprung into action. She grabbed 
Preeti and tried to slow her bleeding.
  After seeing that ambulances were struggling to get through security, 
Gicela drove Preeti herself to get the care she needed.
  Preeti is alive today because of Gicela.
  An amazing story that deserves a heros praise.
  We thank her for her bravery, selflessness and representing the best 
of North Texas.
July 27th marks the 70th 
Anniversary of the signing of the Korean Armistice Agreement, which 
formally ended the Korean War.
  As Co-Chair of Congressional Caucus on Korea, I was grateful to have 
joined my colleagues in welcoming new Ambassador of the Republic of 
Korea to the United States, His Excellency Hyun-Dong Cho and the Korean 
National Assembly ruling party delegation to the U.S. Capitol for a 
breakfast recognizing veterans of the Korean War.
  I valued the opportunity to have met with 6 members of the ruling 
People Power Party Leader, Assemblyman Gi-Hyeon Kim, members of the 
National Assembly Chul-Gyu Lee, Seok-Ki Kim, Sang-Bum Yoo, Min-Kuk 
Kang, and Chairman of the International Relations Committee of the 
People Power Party and former National Assemblyman Jae-Young Lee.
  Visible proof of affection by Americans for the people of the 
Republic of Korea was the Joint Session of Congress speech by President 
Yoon Suk Yeol.
I proclaim the Lake Erie 
College of Osteopathic Medicine (LECOM) as a pillar of the community.
  Whereas, LECOM has been established since 1992 in Erie, Pennsylvania 
as a college of Osteopathic Medicine and now celebrates its 30th 
Anniversary; and
  Whereas, LECOM has grown to become the Nations largest medical 
college with campuses in Erie, Pennsylvania, Greensburg, Pennsylvania, 
Bradenton, Florida, and Elmira, New York; and
  Whereas, LECOM has prepared and graduated more than 16,000 students 
to become osteopathic physicians, pharmacy practitioners, and dentists 
through programs of excellence in education, research, clinical care, 
and community service to enhance the quality of life through improved 
health for all humanity; and
  Whereas, LECOM has expanded its reach to include exceptional programs 
in graduate studies designed to provide scholars superlative education 
in the respective areas of study; and
  Whereas, LECOM is opening a new School of Podiatric Medicine and 
pursuing opportunities to open additional campuses, further 
demonstrating their steadfast commitment to continue expanding 
healthcare education; and
  Whereas, LECOM offers a quality medical education at an affordable 
price with one of the lowest, private medical college tuitions in the 
Nation; and
  Whereas, LECOM provides students a choice of student-centered 
pathways that match the learning styles of individual students to 
promote success.
  Whereas, LECOM has been ranked by U.S. News &amp; World Report as one of 
the top medical colleges for graduating primary care physicians; and
  Whereas, LECOM is the most applied to medical college in the United 
States; and
  Whereas, LECOM has the Nations only osteopathic academic health 
system with its own teaching hospitals, a physician network, and a full 
continuum of services for older adults;
  Now therefore be it resolved, that I proclaim LECOM as an acclaimed 
school of Osteopathic Medicine in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
  Be if further resolved, that during their 30th anniversary, LECOM is 
commended for the exceptional impact the organization has on the 
communities they serve and for their contributions to improving 
healthcare for all.
The House in Committee of the Whole House on the state of 
     the Union had under consideration the bill (H.R. 2670) to 
     authorize appropriations for fiscal year 2024 for military 
     activities of the Department of Defense and for military 
     construction, and for defense activities of the Department of 
     Energy, to prescribe military personnel strengths for such 
     fiscal year, and for other purposes:
.R. 2670, the National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA) for Fiscal 
Year 2024.
  This is an important measure that for over 60 years, Republicans and 
Democrats have come together to support investments authorized in the 
NDAA that will help address the changing global landscape and prepare 
the country for future challenges and threats.
  I along with my colleagues have offered a number of robust and 
thoughtful amendments in furtherance of a process that has generally 
been bipartisan work on behalf of Americas national defense.
  However, I am dismayed that this year, my Republican colleagues in 
the majority have refused meaningful consideration of the majority of 
amendments offered by my Democratic colleagues.
  While I am grateful that one of my amendments was made in order, the 
Jackson Lee Amendment No. 1075 (No. 136 as reported in the Rule) and 
included in the En Bloc package No. 3, it is beyond disappointing and 
disgraceful that my additional 19 amendments were not made in order--
and particularly ones I have offered for many years and have been made 
in order.
  With respect to my amendment that was made in order, I ask for a 
favorable vote on the En Bloc package No. 3 in support of the Jackson 
Lee Amendment No. 1075.
  The Jackson Lee Amendment No. 1075 would require that a report be 
submitted within 220 days of the NDAAs passage detailing our national 
capacity to provide disaster survivors with short term housing.
  In the aftermath of emergencies and national disasters, victims have 
much on their minds.
  Homes, properties, businesses, and livelihoods may have been damaged 
in the disaster, and families, friends, and community members may be 
mentally and physically affected by the disaster, not to mention 
additional challenges as they seek to return to work and school.
  As these communities begin to face the long process of recovery and 
rebuilding, short term housing is one of the first things disaster 
survivors need to get back on their feet.
  Unfortunately, my constituents and I are no stranger to these kinds 
of disasters.
  In 2017, Hurricane Harvey devastated the Houston area, affecting over 
100,000 homes across the city. In the aftermath of the storm, finding 
temporary housing was one of the biggest challenges to recovery for 
many survivors.
  Short-term housing was difficult to coordinate due to the sheer 
number of Houstonians affected.
  As such, it is crucial that Congress have a strong understanding of 
our current capabilities and, specifically, our ability to provide 
these survivors with short term housing before disaster strikes.
  If voted on favorably, this report will not only inform us of our 
current capacity to provide housing but will also better equip Congress 
to respond to disasters and support survivors in the future.
  In addition to this amendment, I offered the below listed amendments.
  Jackson Lee Amendment No. 1010 condemns the actions of Boko Haram and 
directs the Secretary of Defense to submit a report on efforts to 
combat Boko Haram.
  Since 2009, Boko Haram has subjected women and girls to unbearable 
and severe forms of abuse, including sexual slavery, sexual violence, 
forced marriages, forced pregnancies, and forced conversions.
  The United Nations Human Rights Council report on violations and 
abuses committed by this despicable organization reveals the negative 
impact of such violent acts on the affected communities and 
individuals.
  And this year, in March of 2023, Boko Haram displaced at least 3,000 
people in fighting along Nigerian border towns and villages.
  In April of this year, Boko Haram militants also destroyed hundreds 
of homes in Cameroon.
  Despite regional coordination efforts by the African Union in 
creating Multinational Joint Task Force to fight Boko Haram, this 
violent organization continues to commit gross human rights abuses and 
serious violations of international humanitarian law, resulting in 
ongoing casualties and further destruction of property.
  The Jackson Lee Amendment No. 1010 would have supported efforts by 
the African

Union and other international entities to effectively counter the 
atrocities of this organization.
  The Jackson Lee Amendment No. 1084 directs the Secretary of Defense 
to submit to Congress a report on the actions taken to protect members 
of the Armed Forces of the United States from armed attacks conducted 
by militants and terrorists in pursuit of bounties and inducements by 
the agencies, organizations, or entities aligned with the Russian 
Federation.
  In 2020, there were reports that Russia was placing bounties on 
American soldiers.
  Although these reports have not been confirmed, we must be prepared 
to contend with such threats.
  The lives of our Armed Forces should be valued and protected from our 
Nations adversaries.
  It is important that we use our resources to ensure the safety and 
well-being of Americas service members, as their bravery and valor are 
vital for Americas success. It is our duty to ensure that our troops 
can return to their families.
  That is why I introduced an amendment to ensure that a report is made 
detailing the actions taken to protect Armed Forces members from armed 
attacks. Jackson Lee Amendment No. 1084 would have ensured that we take 
a stand against attacks on our military and continue to protect men and 
women serving this country.
  The Jackson Lee Amendment No. 1099 requires the Secretary of Defense 
to report to Congress on the programs and procedures employed to ensure 
students studying abroad through Department of Defense National 
Security Education Programs are trained to recognize, resist, and 
report against recruitment efforts by agents of foreign governments.
  Tens of thousands of American students study abroad each year, with 
hundreds of them going through the Department of Defenses National 
Security Education Programs.
  This past year, the National Security Education Program enrolled 108 
Boren fellows and 210 Boren scholars, in addition to those enrolled in 
the organizations seven other study abroad programs. Protecting these 
students in their time abroad is a priority; hence, the need for the 
Secretary of Defense to ensure students know how to detect foreign 
intelligence and recruitment efforts.
  Generating awareness about risks that study abroad students could 
face overseas will safeguard America from being targeted by foreign 
governments. Security measures offered by my amendment, Jackson Lee 
Amendment No. 1099, would have continued to protect Americas future by 
preventing foreign intelligence services from acquiring tools to 
inflict harm on America.
  The Jackson Lee Amendment No. 1108 requires the Secretary of Defense 
to evaluate the threat to national security posed by domestic terrorist 
groups and organizations motivated by a belief system of white 
supremacy.
  Since 2010, white supremacists have carried out at least 17 lethal 
attacks, resulting in no fewer than 77 deaths. White supremacist 
attacks account for more than half of all fatalities from domestic 
terrorism, per the FBI.
  As such, the FBI has deemed that white supremacists ``pose the 
primary threat in domestic terrorism. FBI reports have identified 
these racially-motivated extremists as part of a transnational movement 
facilitated by online networks.
  Due to the FBIs assessment of a rising threat of domestic violence 
rooted in white supremacy, it is essential that Congress be thoroughly 
informed on this matter.
  This amendment and the report it commissions will provide valuable 
information and an up-to-date, detailed evaluation of the potential 
domestic violence threat these groups pose moving forward.
  In this way, Congress can better create meaningful policy solutions 
that enshrine national security and safety for all. The Jackson Lee 
Amendment No. 1108 offered an important proactive approach to 
combatting domestic terrorism.
on July 17, 2023, I was unable 
to be present for the recorded suspension votes on Roll Call Nos. 329 
and 330. Had I been present, I would have voted YES on Roll Call No. 
329, S. 111--Providing for Accountability Through Transparency Act, as 
amended; and YES on Roll Call No. 330, H.R. 813--Global Investment in 
American Jobs Act of 2023, as amended.
I rise today to speak on the rule for 
H.R. 2670, the National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA) for Fiscal 
Year 2024.
  This is an important measure that for over 60 years, Republicans and 
Democrats have come together to support investments authorized in the 
NDAA that will help address the changing global landscape and prepare 
the country for future challenges and threats.
  I along with my colleagues have offered a number of robust and 
thoughtful amendments in furtherance of a process that has generally 
been bipartisan work on behalf of Americas national defense.
  However, I am dismayed that this year, my Republican colleagues in 
the majority have refused meaningful consideration of the majority of 
amendments offered by my Democratic colleagues.
  While I am grateful that one of my amendments was made in order, the 
Jackson Lee Amendment No. 1075 (No. 136 as reported in the Rule) and 
included in the En Bloc package No. 3, it is beyond disappointing and 
disgraceful that my additional 19 amendments were not made in order--
and particularly ones I have offered for many years and have been made 
in order.
  With respect to my amendment that was made in order, I ask for a 
favorable vote on the En Bloc package No. 3 in support of the Jackson 
Lee Amendment No. 1075.
  The Jackson Lee Amendment No. 1075 would require that a report be 
submitted within 220 days of the NDAAs passage detailing our national 
capacity to provide disaster survivors with short term housing.
  In the aftermath of emergencies and national disasters, victims have 
much on their minds.
  Homes, properties, businesses, and livelihoods may have been damaged 
in the disaster, and families, friends, and community members may be 
mentally and physically affected by the disaster, not to mention 
additional challenges as they seek to return to work and school.
  As these communities begin to face the long process of recovery and 
rebuilding, short term housing is one of the first things disaster 
survivors need to get back on their feet.
  Unfortunately, my constituents and I are no stranger to these kinds 
of disasters.
  In 2017, Hurricane Harvey devastated the Houston area, affecting over 
100,000 homes across the city. In the aftermath of the storm, finding 
temporary housing was one of the biggest challenges to recovery for 
many suIvivors.
  Short-term housing was difficult to coordinate due to the sheer 
number of Houstonians affected. As such, it is crucial that Congress 
have a strong understanding of our current capabilities and, 
specifically, our ability to provide these survivors with short term 
housing before disaster strikes.
  If voted on favorably, this report will not only inform us of our 
current capacity to provide housing but will also better equip Congress 
to respond to disasters and support survivors in the future.
  In addition to this amendment, I offered the below listed amendments.
  The Jackson Lee Amendment No. 1051 directed the Secretary of Defense 
to submit a report on the naming practices recognizing African American 
service members in the Department of Defense.
  Throughout the history of our Nation, from the Battle of Lexington 
through the Battle of Fallujah to Afghanistan and Iraq, Black soldiers 
have served honorably and answered the call to duty during our nations 
time of maximum danger.
  For over 200 years, African Americans have participated in every 
conflict that confronted this Nation.
  Besides fighting the common enemies of this country with unmatched 
bravery and valor, Black soldiers also had to confront individual and 
institutional racism of their countrymen.
  African American servicemembers have served with great valor and 
distinction in all branches of our nations armed forces.
  Since the revolutionary war, Black Americans have faithfully defended 
this Nation and built a legacy of courage, commitment, and 
professionalism.
  Like any other group of Americans, Black soldiers have served the 
armed forces with great honor, distinction, and generational 
inspiration.
  The Jackson Lee Amendment No. 1051 would have ensured that the 
legacies of Black American servicemembers are duly recognized and 
honored.
  The Jackson Lee Amendment No. 1104 requires a report to be submitted 
to Congress within 240 days of NDAA enactment on the risks posed by 
debris in low Earth orbit and to make recommendations on remediation of 
risks and outline plans to reduce the incident of space debris.
  Space debris encompasses both natural and artificial particles and 
this amendment would address the risk of man-made space debris. Man-
made objects in Earths orbit that may no longer serve a useful 
function can include nonfunctional spacecraft, abandoned launch vehicle 
stages, mission-related debris and fragmentation debris.
  Space debris travels at speeds up to 17,500 miles per hour--fast 
enough for a small piece of man-made debris to damage a satellite or a 
spacecraft.
  There are more than 20,000 pieces of debris larger than a softball 
orbiting the Earth. There are 500,000 pieces of debris the size of a 
marble or larger tracked by NASA, and there are many millions of pieces 
of debris that are so small they cant be tracked.
  This amendment seeks a report on risks posed by man-made space 
debris, solutions for reducing risks, and strategies for reducing the 
incidence of more man-made space debris being introduced into space.
  Jackson Lee Amendment No. 1104 would have addressed these challenges.
  Jackson Lee Amendment No. 1402 requires the Secretary of Defense to 
ensure that military academy graduates undergo screening for speech 
disorders and be provided with their results.
  Many officer positions and occupation specialists require successful 
performance on the speech test, so it is essential that military 
academy students are aware of their status as they shape their career 
path.
  Under this amendment, military academy students would have the option 
of undergoing speech therapy to reduce speech disorders or impediments.
  Thus, military academy students who do not perform successfully on 
the speech test have the opportunity to improve their performance and 
potentially go on to pursue the officer and specialist positions they 
seek.
  Approximately 5-10 percent of all children stutter as they develop 
language skills. Boys are 2 to 3 times more likely to stutter than 
girls. And approximately 75 percent of children recover from 
stuttering, but the remaining 25 percent will experience life-long 
effects of stuttering.
  I offered this amendment to help entrants into military academies 
find the right career fit for their military service after graduation.
  I learned about the issue of stuttering and its implications for a 
successful military career through the experiences of a Legislative 
Fellow who once served in my D.C. office.
  He was a 2016 graduate from the United States Naval Academy with a 
degree in Operations Research and a veteran naval officer who was 
separated from the Navy in April 2019 because his speech fluency 
testing results did not meet the Naval Aviation community standards, 
and so he was disqualified from serving as an aviator.
  At that critical juncture he was not informed about what careers he 
could qualify to fill that would not be impacted by the determination 
regarding his speech.
  This Jackson Lee Amendment No. 1402 would have represented an 
important investment in military academy students, improving 
transparency and providing avenues for personal improvement, ensuring 
quality candidates for vital military leadership positions.
  Jackson Lee Amendment No. 1405 removes bill language about Critical 
Race Theory, thereby rejecting any efforts to inject politics into the 
armed services.
  In this way, my amendment affirms the importance of July 26, 1948, 
the date that President Harry Truman signed Executive Order 9981, 
creating the Presidents Committee on Equality of Treatment and 
Opportunity in the Armed Services.
  This executive order desegregated the military and declared that 
there shall be equality of treatment and opportunity for all in the 
armed services without regard to race, color, religion, or national 
origin.
  This was a major step forward and was the result of dedicated 
advocacy efforts from the NAACP and ACLU, as well as President Trumans 
own commitment to the issue.
  The importance of this Executive Order and the change it brought 
about cannot be overstated. The diversity of the military and the 
equality of opportunity found there is one of the major strengths of 
the armed services.
  It is crucial that the armed services continue their commitment to 
live out the promises of equality and opportunity enshrined in 
Executive Order 9981.
  The current provisions of the NDAA which prohibit the use of federal 
funds for critical race theory are largely political in nature and 
represent a step away from the promises President Truman made of 
equality and opportunity in the military. The Jackson Lee Amendment No. 
1405 would have ensured that these

political provisions are struck, thereby affirming the value of 
diversity and equality of opportunity throughout our military.
  Jackson Lee Amendment No. 1406 requires a report be provided to the 
House and Senate Armed Services committee on the extent that readiness 
relies on electricity availability to bases, installations, and duty 
stations.
  The report would provide an assessment on the militarys reliance 
upon electricity service provided by transformers that manage power 
transmission from high power lines to end points. The assessment would 
evaluate supply chain issues impacting the availability of transformers 
and surplus transformers held in reserve by the military. The report 
would also assess the overall market supply and demand for 
transformers, and any risks that market availability issues of 
transformers pose to military readiness, to ensure recommendations on 
resolving any risk to readiness posed by supply chain issues with 
transformers. The report would also evaluate the extent if any that 
extreme weather plays on transformer supply. As such, Congress can be 
best informed on military readiness if supply chain issues with 
transformers persist. And Congress can ensure that the bases, 
installations, and duty stations of the armed services maintain the 
electricity they need to remain reliable and fulfill their function, 
even in times of crisis induced by natural disasters or supply chain 
issues. This Jackson Lee Amendment No. 1406 offered a proactive 
approach to military electricity supply and would have ensured informed 
responses when issues arise.
  Jackson Lee Amendment No. 1509 helps to address military recruitment 
and retention needs by providing the following modifications to the J-1 
Visa process:
  J-1 Visa holders who have been legally admitted into the United 
States and have successfully completed 8 months out of a 12-month visa 
duration or 14 months out of an 18-month visa duration may pursue 
opportunities to join the military. If inducted into the armed 
services, they would qualify for permanent residency provided they meet 
other enlistment requirements, military fitness standards, have no 
criminal background, and are of good conduct during their period of 
enlistment and during which time they may pursue citizenship.
  During the first years of the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq, many 
military experts expressed concerns that the constant deployments could 
negatively impact the force with the expectation that fewer young 
Americans would volunteer to serve in a wartime military. The 
expectations of these experts seem tenable given the current 
recruitment crisis following our full withdrawal from Afghanistan the 
summer of 2022.
  With the current trend, this recruitment crisis shows no signs of 
abating anytime soon. As a result, we see shrinking numbers in all 
branches of our forces. To put this in perspective, the last fiscal 
year, the Army missed its recruitment goal by about 15,000 active-duty 
soldiers, roughly 25 percent of its target. Consequently, the army was 
forced to cut its projected active-duty end strength from about 476,000 
down to around 466,000. Shrinking numbers is not caused by strategic 
choices but largely due to the lack of qualified volunteers. The 
Jackson Lee Amendment No. 1509 would have addressed this recruitment 
crisis with serious implications for our strategic position in this 
increasingly uncertain and dangerous world.
  The Jackson Lee Amendment No. l510 directs the Secretary of Defense 
to establish a task force 180 days after enactment that will report to 
the House and Senate Armed Services Committees and make publicly 
available an annual report that explains the progress made over the 
history of the Department of Defense and its predecessor departments 
(Department of War) and experiences in integrating African Americans 
into the branches of the armed services and the civilian staffing of 
Pentagon offices and agencies.
  The report shall provide information on the lessons learned about the 
social, cultural, legal, and logistical challenges faced, obstacles 
incurred, advances made, and the impact of integration on the 
warfighting capacity of the Nation.
  In this way, the lessons of military integration can be drawn upon by 
policy makers charged with the important and necessary work of binding 
up the nations wounds first inflicted with the governmental 
legalization and tolerance of slavery in the United States. The Jackson 
Lee Amendment No. 1510 would have made this possible.
  Jackson Lee Amendment No. 1512 requires the Chief of the National 
Guard Bureau, in coordination with the Secretary of Defense, to submit 
a report identifying the personnel, training, and equipment required by 
the non-federalized National Guard to prevent, mitigate, respond to, 
and recover from natural and manmade disasters.
  It is always hard to ever fully be prepared for what is to come 
whenever any form of disaster strikes. It therefore helps to know that 
the survival specialists of the Air National Guard are always equipped, 
ready, and quick to respond and assist the affected communities. 
Whenever a state of emergency is declared, it is because the 
authorities believe that the disaster that has occurred or is imminent, 
is severe enough to require State or federal aid to increase local 
resources to prevent and alleviate damage, suffering, and hardship to 
the affected communities.
  The Air National Guard has an exceptionally unique role in aiding the 
prevention and recovery of these forms of disasters disaster. Jackson 
Lee Amendment No. 1512 would have ensured that the Air National Guard 
was prepared to successfully fulfill their role in disaster prevention 
and recovery.
  Jackson Lee Amendment No. 15l4 requires the Secretary of the Navy, 
not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, to 
submit to the congressional defense committees a report on 
desalinization technologys application for defense and national 
security purposes to provide drought relief to areas impacted by sharp 
declines in water resources.
  Throughout the history of our Nation, the U.S. Navy has been a 
pioneer in national defense and security technology. The two main types 
of desalination systems on Navy ships, including reverse osmosis and 
distillation, produce up to 12,000 gallons of fresh, drinkable water a 
day.
  The U.S. Navy has a unique opportunity to share resources and 
technology that lowers the cost of clean water production and use low-
carbon energy sources. Now, as climate change becomes an increasing 
national security concern, desalinization technology could have 
rippling benefits for drought concerns here in the U.S. and around the 
world.
  In one of the most unstable and geopolitical regions of the world, 
the Middle East and North Africa, water scarcity is a severe problem, 
with over 60 percent of the population having little or no access to 
drinking water. Currently, the region is heavily dependent on their 
current system of desalination, which is expensive and energy 
intensive. As many as 13 out of 22 Arab countries fall into the 
category of severe water scarcity and Navy desalination technology 
could make significant improvements in their process, addressing both 
climate change and security concerns.
  Beyond addressing humanitarian concerns, this report will support 
needs here at home as water scarcity is a growing concern. New 
desalination technologies could give Americans an opportunity to be 
prepared for the next water crisis. Jackson Lee Amendment No. 1514 
offered a proactive approach to protecting our national security and 
our planet as a whole.
I rise today to recognize Rosa Margaret 
Cartwright of Ypsilanti, Michigan, on the occasion of her 100th 
Birthday. Her dedication to her family and local community over the 
last century is worthy of commendation.
  Rosa was born on July 18, 1923, in Roanoke, Alabama to Eva and George 
Dozier. Rosa came to Michigan by way of Ohio in the 1940s. During this 
time, she attended the National Beauty Culturists League for 
Cosmetology and held the title of 3rd Vice President and Secretary to 
the League. Rosa also pledged Theta Nu Sigma sorority and is currently 
1 of the oldest living sorority members. She has also held the title of 
Theta Nu Sigmas Ambassador for the State of Michigan for many years.
  After receiving her degree in Cosmetology, Rosa married her husband 
Benjamin in 1951. Together the couple had 4 children. A proud small 
business owner, Rosa was the owner and proprietor of Tonys Beauty 
Salon for over 70 years in addition to a small convenience store. Rosa 
is still an active community member and has served in many city and 
local organizations, including the Eastern Star as well as serving as 
Choir Director and Vice President of Mount Olive Baptist Church. Rosa 
still meets up weekly with a group of avid game players, and until 
recently taught piano.
, I ask my colleagues to join me today in celebrating the 
100th birthday of Mrs. Rosa Cartwright. We are so proud of her 
continued tenacity and spirit at such a well-seasoned age. She 
continues to be a pillar of the Ypsilanti community and is a true 
beacon of love and friendship to all family and friends that are lucky 
enough to be in her presence. Happy birthday to Rosa.