I rise today in recognition of more than 
two decades of extraordinary public service by Catherine (Katie) Rice 
to the County of Marin Board of Supervisors, as an aide, supervisor, 
and president.
  Supervisor Rice has deep roots in Marin County. Raised in Mill 
Valley, she graduated from Tamalpais High School and received degrees 
in both Liberal Studies and English from Sonoma State University. After 
college, she worked as a journalist for several North Bay publications 
and developed professional skills researching complex community issues. 
She settled in San Anselmo where she raised her three children and 
became an active community leader.
  An effective advocate for high-quality education, land preservation, 
and environmental stewardship, Supervisor Rice co-founded the Ross 
Valley Schools Foundation, served on the Sleepy Hollow Homeowners 
Association Board, and assisted in the creation of a master plan for 
San Domenico School.
  In 2003, Supervisor Rice expanded her public service work as an aide 
to former Marin County Supervisor Hal Brown. Her connections throughout 
the greater Ross Valley community made her an important asset to 
Supervisor Brown. After helping him win reelection, he chose Supervisor 
Rice to lead his office as Chief Aide, a role she held for eight years. 
When Supervisor Brown was diagnosed with pancreatic cancer in 2011, she 
was appointed to his seat by Governor Jerry Brown. She was then 
officially selected by voters in 2012, 2016, and 2020.

  Supervisor Rice is known for her critical thinking skills and 
professional style, always applying informed decision making and 
attention to the concerns of her constituents. She doesnt shy away 
from complicated issues. She has taken lead roles in a multitude of 
initiatives, including flooding in Ross Valley and developed a keen 
understanding of how to work with agency partners such as the United 
States Army Corp of Engineers.
  Always steadfast in her values to protect our vulnerable communities, 
she was largely responsible for the completion of major projects 
including Project Homekey, permanent supportive housing in Larkspur, 
and the establishment of the Marin Wildfire Protection Authority, which 
organizes countywide wildfire prevention and preparedness efforts.
  It was my privilege and honor to work with Supervisor Rice. She is 
not afraid to rise to the occasion and embrace complex challenges from 
mitigating sea-level rise and greenhouse gas admissions to improving 
community health and reducing homelessness. I appreciate her 
collaborative leadership style, strong work ethic, and wit.
, Katie Rice was a tireless advocate for Marin County and 
her legacy cannot be overstated. I respectfully ask that you join me in 
expressing my sincere gratitude for her decades of good work and in 
sending her best wishes on her next endeavors.
HONORING CHANCELLOR DR. PHIL DiSTEFANOS CAREER OF LEADERSHIP IN 
                              of colorado
I rise today to honor and celebrate Dr. Phil 
DiStefano, a man whose 15 years of leadership as Chancellor of the 
University of Colorado Boulder and a half-century of dedication to CU 
Boulder have left an indelible mark on the university. Ive had the 
privilege of witnessing firsthand the profound impact that Chancellor 
DiStefanos leadership has had on CU and across our state.
  Phils journey is nothing short of inspiring. A first-generation 
college student from Steubenville, Ohio, his academic and professional 
path has taken him from Ohio to the heights of leadership at one of our 
Nations top universities. His journey is a testament to the 
transformative power of education and the potential that lies within 
each of us. While he may have started in Ohio, Colorado is his home 
today, and our state has greatly benefited from his presence.
  Throughout his tenure as Chancellor, Dr. DiStefano was committed to 
making CU Boulder a nationally recognized research institution that 
shapes tomorrows leaders and positively impacts society. Under his 
leadership, CU Boulder has awarded nearly 117,000 degrees and raised 
over $2 billion in philanthropic gifts. Through his work in technology 
transfer, Chancellor DiStefano has paved the way for substantial growth 
in the university, including the creation of 40 startup ventures and 
the signing of 223 license and option agreements.
  The universitys research and innovation efforts have had a 
significant influence not only on the local economy but also on the 
entire Nation. Over the past five years, CU Boulders commercialization 
activities alone generated a domestic economic impact of $1.9 billion, 
supporting an estimated 11,545 jobs and contributing $1.2 billion to 
the states economy, and has ensured that CU Boulder remains at the 
forefront of research.
  As Dr. DiStefano transitions to his new role as Senior Executive 
Director of the CU Boulder Center for Leadership, we know that his 
legacy of student success, faculty excellence, and campus 
sustainability has elevated CU Boulder to the top tier of academic 
institutions, making it a beacon of excellence across the country. I 
want to personally express my gratitude to Chancellor DiStefano for his 
service to our community, Colorado, and our Nation. His contributions 
will be felt for decades to come.
  I thank Phil for his leadership and dedication to CU Boulder. It has 
been an honor to work alongside him.
today, I rise to honor the loss of 
retired Chief Warrant Officer Daniel Peterson--a champion for southern 
Nevadas veteran community.
  Chief Peterson was a highly decorated Army Veteran and unrelenting 
advocate for those around him.
  After flying helicopters in the Army for more than 20 years, he came 
home to serve as Commander of the Henderson Chapter of the Military 
Order of the Purple Heart, be a member of the Henderson Vietnam 
Veterans of America, and attend as many Unaccompanied Veterans Burial 
Ceremonies as he could find. He also attended every Veterans Treatment 
Court graduation and never hesitated to offer his support to fellow 
veterans in need.
  To be clear: it is impossible to sum up Chief Petersons decades of 
service in just one speech on the House floor. Thats part of the 
reason why I had the privilege of working with the Library of Congress 
for his story to be part of the Veterans History Project.
  But while he has too many medals to name here, I can say this: Chief 
Peterson, you were a mentor, leader, a friend, a protector, and a 
servant to both southern Nevada and our entire country.
  We all owe him a debt of gratitude, and we will all miss him.
I rise today to recognize the 
accomplishments of Dr. Daniel N. Baker, who, for the last three 
decades, has served as the Director of the Laboratory for Atmospheric 
and Space Physics (LASP), one of the longest-established and top-funded 
research institutes at the University of Colorado Boulder. In this 
position, Director Baker has been instrumental in advancing LASP and 
the university into an epicenter of space science research and 
aerospace workforce development crucial to Colorado and our Nation.
  Director Baker simultaneously serves as a professor in three 
University of Colorado Boulder departments, including Astrophysical and 
Planetary Sciences, Aerospace Engineering Sciences, and Physics. During 
his tenure, Director Baker has published more than 900 papers, edited 
nine books, and won numerous prestigious awards for his research and 
leadership. He also has continuously contributed to the international 
advancement of topics in space physics.
  Director Baker has built LASP into one of the top academic space 
research centers and the only one in the world to send an instrument to 
explore every planet in our solar system. Under his leadership, LASP 
grew from approximately 180 to 750 employees, about one-quarter of whom 
are students. Over the years, the institute has provided hands-on 
training on numerous NASA missions for hundreds of CU Boulder students. 
Some of these students have returned to LASP as employees, while others 
now work at NASA centers and in aerospace businesses across the 
country, extending Director Bakers legacy for decades to come.
  Under his guidance, CUs laboratory has helped revolutionize our 
understanding of the cosmos, conducting numerous important missions, 
including NASAs Cassini mission to Saturn, the New Horizons mission to 
Pluto, and SNOE, one of the space agencys first small satellite 
missions.
  Director Bakers contributions will continue to be felt in Colorado, 
across the country, and throughout the world for decades to come. I 
want to congratulate him as he shifts to a new focus on space policy at 
the university and thank him for his stellar service to our community, 
Colorado, and the Nation.
I rise today to honor the 
remarkable life and legacy of Mr. Alfred Williams, a pioneer in the 
world of professional bass fishing and an inspirational figure in the 
ongoing struggle for racial equality in America.
  Although federal laws and court rulings of the 1950s and 1960s 
mandated racial desegregation, the reality on the ground in many parts 
of the South, particularly in Jackson, Mississippi, remained starkly 
different. Persistent and often insurmountable barriers continued to 
divide communities. It was within this challenging environment that Mr. 
Alfred Williams grew up, demonstrating resilience, quiet determination, 
and extraordinary skill that would ultimately break barriers and 
inspire generations.
  After bravely serving our country in the Vietnam War, Mr. Williams 
returned home and turned his attention to bass fishing. Entering a 
predominately white arena, he became a trailblazer, competing in bass 
tournaments where he was often the only Black angler in the field. 
Despite the obstacles he faced, he consistently demonstrated his talent 
and tenacity, earning victories and accolades that spoke louder than 
any words.
  In 1983, Mr. Williams made history as the first Blank angler to 
qualify for the Bassmaster Classic, the pinnacle of professional bass 
fishing. Competing against 42 of the worlds best anglers on the Ohio 
River in Cincinnati, Ohio, where he finished in an impressive 10th 
place, surpassing legendary names like Hank Parker, Rick Clunn, Denny 
Brauer, and Roland Martin. This groundbreaking achievement opened doors 
for future Black anglers, paving the way for figures such as Ish 
Monroe, Mark Daniels Jr., and others to follow.
a pioneer in breaking racial barriers but 
also a visionary innovator in the sport itself. He is credited with 
popularizing the use of hollow-body frogs in

bass fishing. His innovative techniques, including modifications to 
weight, hook, settings, and lure design, revolutionized the 
effectiveness of these baits. These innovations were so impactful that 
Snag Proof incorporated them into its tournament models, further 
cementing his legacy in the sport.
  Over the course of his extraordinary career, Alfred Williams competed 
in nearly 300 BASSMASTER and FLW events, achieving four pro-level 
victories, more than 200 tournament wins on Ross Barnett Reservoir, and 
numerous Top 10 finishes. Beyond his personal achievements, Mr. 
Williams has dedicated himself to mentoring and inspiring other African 
American anglers in Mississippi and across the Nation, becoming a 
beacon of hope and perseverance.
, Alfred Williams legacy transcends the sport of bass 
fishing. He is a testament to the power of resilience, skill, and quiet 
confidence in overcoming barriers and achieving excellence. On behalf 
of the people of Mississippis 2nd Congressional District and the 
entire Nation, I am honored to recognize and celebrate his 
contributions to our society.
I rise today to recognize David 
Winnacker as he retires from his role as Chief of the Moraga-Orinda 
Fire District.
  David has worked tirelessly to promote public safety and improve 
quality of life for residents of the East Bay. David served with the 
Fresno Fire Department and Alameda Fire District before joining the 
Moraga-Orinda Fire District (MOFD) in 2017. David also served in the 
Marine Corps and remains in the Marine Corps Reserves. He has earned 
the rank of Colonel, serving as the Commanding Officer for the Fourth 
Reconnaissance Company and as the Deputy Commander of the Twenty-Third 
Marine Regiment.
  During his time with MOFD, David has shown his dedication to 
mitigating wildfire risk and making our community safer. Under his 
leadership, MOFD developed a strategic plan to implement early warning 
systems and provide real-time fire spread modeling. He has worked to 
expand MOFDs outreach to the community, providing critical education 
and resources to property owners to implement fuels mitigation 
techniques at their homes. Further, he was worked collaboratively with 
local elected officials, insurance industry representatives, and other 
key stakeholders to improve emergency preparedness throughout the fire 
district. Davids efforts have been critical in reducing wildfire risk 
and keeping residents safe.
  Please join me in congratulating Chief Winnacker on his well-deserved 
retirement after years of outstanding service.
I rise today along with Representative 
John Garamendi to recognize Mark Ross as he retires from his role with 
the Martinez City Council.
  Throughout his life, Mark has been a strong advocate for the City of 
Martinez in California and has worked tirelessly to improve the lives 
of Contra Costa residents. Mark grew up in Martinez, attending Alhambra 
High School, and earned his degree in English Literature from UC 
Berkeley. He went on to start Ross Company Realtors where he has helped 
guide clients through Contra Costas real estate market for the last 30 
years.
  Mark has been a devoted public servant and has continually shown his 
commitment to Martinez residents. He has served on the Martinez City 
Council since 1996 where he has been critical in fostering a strong 
sense of community throughout the City. During his time on Council, he 
has worked to improve public safety, bolster Martinezs historic 
downtown, and protect Martinezs open spaces and environment. Further, 
Mark has spent much of his time focusing on Californias environment. 
He played a critical role in the Alhambra Creek Restoration Project, 
which has helped to protect the watershed and native plant life. 
Additionally, Mark has served as a Director on the Bay Area Air Quality 
Management Districts (BAAQMD) board since 2001, where he has worked on 
reducing emissions, supporting the health and safety of Bay Area 
residents, and leading regional efforts to address the challenges 
associated with climate change.
  Please join me and Representative Garamendi in thanking Mark Ross for 
his many contributions to our region and in congratulating him on his 
well-deserved retirement.
HONORING TROY A. MILLERS SERVICE TO THE U.S. CUSTOMS AND BORDER 
                              of tennessee
I rise today to honor an 
individual whose dedication and sacrifice have helped to secure our 
Nation. I would like to recognize Troy A. Miller, a remarkable 
individual whose 31 years of service to this country have culminated in 
his final role leading U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP) as the 
Senior Official Performing the Duties of the Commissioner. In this 
position, he directed CBPs 65,000 employees in executing its three 
core missions of counterterrorism, border security, and trade 
enforcement, while facilitating $4 trillion in trade and facilitating 
travel of over 410 million people through ports of entry.
  As he prepares to retire, I rise to recognize a career defined by 
integrity, selflessness, and an unwavering commitment to public 
service. Every time he was asked to fill a critical leadership role, he 
quickly answered the call and served with distinction.
  I also want to extend my appreciation to his family who have 
supported him throughout his incredible career. I offer my sincere 
thanks to his wife, Jennifer, and his daughter, Alexandria.
  Troy led CBP, the Nations largest law enforcement agency, through a 
myriad of challenges, to include the COVID-19 pandemic, surges of 
migration along the Nations borders, and hurricane relief efforts.
  Among his many notable achievements, Troy confronted the scourge of 
fentanyl by evolving CBP to not only match but surpass the 
sophistication and persistence of the criminal organizations 
responsible for trafficking this lethal drug across our borders and 
into our communities. His efforts brought together coordinated 
intelligence and special enforcement operations to find and intercept 
fentanyl wherever it attempted to infiltrate our borders--whether in 
cargo, among travelers, or through small packages. Furthermore, he 
extended these efforts beyond our borders, taking the fight to local 
cartel leaders and dismantling the foreign supply chains responsible 
for aiding the proliferation of this criminal activity.
  Troy also made his mark as a true champion of the dedicated CBP 
workforce. He was not only a fierce advocate for the agencys 
technology, infrastructure, and resource needs, but also a driving 
force in fostering a culture that prioritized the health and well-being 
of its people--CBPs greatest asset. Troy recognized the critical 
importance of mission readiness and understood the intense pressures 
associated with a career at CBP. He spearheaded the development and 
expansion of CBPs workforce care program, making significant 
investments in the physical, mental, emotional, and spiritual health of 
its personnel. He focused on removing stigmas, delivering services 
directly to employees across the Nation, and providing specialized 
support to help CBPs workforce navigate the tough operational 
situations they face every day.
  Through his distinguished career at CBP, Troy made significant 
advancements to the national and economic security of the United 
States.
  Between December 2021 and November 2022, Troy served as CBPs Deputy 
Commissioner, the agencys senior career official, responsible for 
overseeing the daily operations of CBPs expansive mission.
  Prior to his role as Deputy Commissioner, Troy served as the 
Director, Field Operations for CBPs New York Field Office where he was 
responsible for CBPs national security, anti-terrorism, immigration, 
agriculture, and trade enforcement operations at two of the countrys 
busiest international airports--John F. Kennedy International Airport 
and Newark Liberty International Airport--the East Coasts largest 
container seaport in New York/Newark, and CBPs Pharmaceutical, Health 
and Chemicals Center of Excellence and Expertise.
  Troy also served as the first Executive Director of the CBP National 
Targeting Center, where he expanded CBPs targeting, research, and 
analysis capabilities, and strengthened interagency and international 
coordination to screen, vet, and mitigate high-risk cargo and 
travelers. He established Counter Network and Counterterrorism 
Divisions within the National Targeting Center, transforming CBPs 
approach to identifying threat actors and dismantling the transnational 
criminal and terrorist networks that support them. Under his 
leadership, and pursuant to National Security Presidential Memorandum-
9, the National Vetting Center was established as an interagency 
solution for vetting support and strategically located at the National 
Targeting Center. To this day, Troys national security targeting 
expertise is recognized worldwide.
  From 2013 to 2015, Troy served as the Acting Assistant Commissioner, 
Office of Intelligence and Investigative Liaison, where he initiated an 
organizational restructuring in direct support of field components and 
border enforcement entities that partner with them and promoted 
initiatives to transcend physical borders. In addition, he has held 
numerous leadership positions including Assistant Port Director, 
Seattle; Director of Targeting and Analysis, Office of Intelligence and 
Operations Coordination; and Director of the National Targeting Center-
Passenger.
  Troy began his federal career with the U.S. Customs Service in 1993 
as a Customs Inspector. He received the Distinguished Executive 
Presidential Rank Award in 2016 and was awarded the Meritorious 
Executive Presidential Rank Award in 2021.
  Troys 31 years of devoted service to our great Nation is a shining 
example of a life to which we should all aspire and is deserving of our 
gratitude. His meaningful contributions to CBP have strengthened the 
organization and his legacy will be the foundation for future leaders. 
Troy will be missed, but we wish him well as he enters this new chapter 
of life alongside Jennifer and Alexandria.
on February 13, 2024, I was unable to cast my 
vote on:
  H. Res. 863--Impeaching Alejandro Nicholas Mayorkas, Secretary of 
Homeland Security, for high crimes and misdemeanors.
  Had I been present, I would have voted NAY on Roll Call No. 43.
I rise to recognize the patriotism of 
Jordan Ramirez.
  Jordan Ramirez resides in La Puente with his parents and older 
sister. He and his family started participating in 5K races when Jordan 
was 4. Their first race was at Disneyland, where Jordan dressed up as 
Captain America because he loved superheroes and would often talk about 
showing support for firefighters, police and military members.
  Jordan broke a world record by doing seven marathons in seven 
continents by the age of 10. As hes gotten older, Jordans mindset 
about showing his support to military and first responders has remained 
the same. When races were canceled due to the pandemic, Jordan found 
the walks to be another way to express that support.
  When Jordan first began his appreciation walks in September 2020, his 
father, Dimas Ramirez, created an Instagram account to document the 
journey, called ``thankyouforyourservicewalk.
  The account has connected Jordan with many of the departments they 
have honored, and continues to be a means for other first responder 
departments requests to build morale.
  Jordans purpose behind the walks is two-fold: to thank first 
responders for their service, and to show appreciation and respect for 
what they do. The walks are different from the marathons hes run 
because with those, he would ``usually just run for the fun of it, but 
the walks . . . its doing something else for our military and first 
responders.
  Most of these walks are in southern California, but the walks have 
also taken him to San Francisco, New York City, and Washington, D.C.
  Jordan is currently a high school sophomore and working on his next 
goals: earning a nomination to the Naval Academy to become an officer 
in the Marine Corps and then to become a firefighter.
, I urge all my colleagues to join me in recognizing the 
incredible contributions and patriotism of Jordan Ramirez.
Title IV of Senate Resolution 4, agreed to by the Senate of February 
4, 1977, calls for establishment of a system for a computerized 
schedule of all meetings and hearings of Senate committees, 
subcommittees, joint committees, and committees of conference. This 
title requires all such committees to notify the Office of the Senate 
Daily Digest--designated by the Rules Committee--of the time, place and 
purpose of the meetings, when scheduled and any cancellations or 
changes in the meetings as they occur.
  As an additional procedure along with the computerization of this 
information, the Office of the Senate Daily Digest will prepare this 
information for printing in the Extensions of Remarks section of the 
Congressional Record on Monday and Wednesday of each week.
  Meetings scheduled for Thursday, December 19, 2024 may be found in 
the Daily Digest of todays Record.
I rise today to honor and congratulate Bill 
Zimmerman, who is completing his term as mayor of the city of Menifee, 
California. Bill has been a true leader in Riverside County for decades 
and served as an effective advocate whose many tireless efforts to 
better our region will be missed.
  Bill attended Vanguard University in Costa Mesa, California from 1981 
to 1984. In 1989, along with his wife Julie, Bill purchased a new home 
in the community of Menifee. After the town incorporated in 2008, Bill 
was appointed to serve on its first Planning Commission. He also served 
on the Citys Parks, Recreation &amp; Trails Commission. Bill was first 
elected to serve on the Menifee City Council in 2012 to represent 
District 3.
  In 2020, Bill was elected to serve as Menifees directly elected 
mayor. As mayor, Bill has worked tirelessly to support the 
infrastructure and recreational opportunities required from a growing 
residential community. My office and I have been proud to work hand-in-
hand with Bill and city staff to support these efforts with federal 
resources. In addition to his role at city hall, Bill serves on the 
Board for Boys &amp; Girls Club, Menifee Valley Historical Association, and 
is President of the Antelope-Menifee Rural Center Board.
  Bill clearly possesses a passionate belief in public service and a 
dedication to the community he has served so faithfully. I know I speak 
on behalf of all residents in expressing my heartfelt thanks and praise 
for Bills significant contributions to Menifee. I wish Bill and his 
family the very best in the years to come.