this February, I had the privilege of 
commemorating the 30th anniversary of the tragic passing of a fallen 
hero, Officer David C. Douglass. On February 18, 1994, Officer Douglass 
valiantly answered the call of a burglar in the area and tragically 
lost his life in the line of duty. He was not only a dedicated member 
of the Lower Township Police Department for 18 years but also served as 
a lieutenant in the Town Bank Fire Department. His contributions to 
public safety extended beyond his role in law enforcement; he helped 
establish the Lower Township SWAT team, instructed at the Cape May 
County Police Academy, and served as a past president of the 
Policemans Benevolent Association. Officer Douglass was a beloved 
member of our community, known for his integrity, friendship, and 
mentorship. His legacy lives on through his family, including his wife, 
son, daughter, and stepdaughter, as well as in the hearts of all who 
knew him. I thank Officer David C. Douglass for his bravery, his 
service, and his sacrifice. He will forever be remembered and cherished 
in our hearts. God Bless Officer Douglass and God Bless the United 
States of America.
this February, I had the pleasure of 
attending the Eagle Scout Court of Honor for Ian Crowley, a young man 
who is a model of dedication, perseverance, and commitment to community 
service. During his time in the Scouts, Ian has learned the importance 
of preserving and celebrating our history, a lesson which inspired his

Eagle Scout project. He undertook a major task and installed QR codes 
at the Lifesaving Station, a local historical site in South Jersey. 
These codes provide access to videos that detail each of the artifacts 
histories, preserving the knowledge for generations to come. Beyond his 
time spent with the Scouts, Ian excels academically and demonstrates a 
remarkable work ethic. He always keeps busy, whether thats his pursuit 
of his pilots license or his participation in the Ocean City High 
School golf team. In recognition of his outstanding achievements, Ian 
has been honored with the Order of the Arrow, an award which celebrates 
his dedication to community service, leadership, and the preservation 
of history. I congratulate Ian on all accomplishments. He makes us all 
proud. God Bless Ian and God Bless the United States of America.
last month, I had the honor of celebrating 
Jayson Cagle, a remarkable young man from Pittsgrove, South Jersey, who 
has achieved the rank of Eagle Scout with Boy Scouts of America Troop 
1058. Jaysons journey to Eagle Scout is not just a personal triumph 
but a testament to his unwavering commitment to making a positive 
impact in his surroundings. His Eagle Scout project, improving his high 
schools music room, reflects his dedication to both his community and 
his passion for music. As a graduating high school senior this year, 
Jayson has been accepted into Seton Hall Universitys School of 
Diplomacy and International Relations, where he hopes to learn how to 
serve his country on the global stage. Jaysons commitment to service 
and leadership is an inspiration to us all. Im proud to congratulate 
him for his achievements and I wish him all the best. God Bless Jayson 
and God Bless the United States of America.
a few weeks ago, the students at Mt. Harmony 
Elementary School, located in my district, accomplished a terrific 
feat: they became published authors. Each grade wrote and illustrated a 
book documenting their recent visit to the National Mall right here in 
the heart of our Nations capital. I thank their librarian Melaney 
Sanchez, Mt. Harmony PTA Treasurer Jennifer Franco, National Mall 
Education Specialist Ranger Jen Epstein, and everyone else who helped 
make this extraordinary, hands-on learning experience possible. 
Together, they took more than 600 kids to Washington, D.C.
  During these visits, the students learned about American history and 
the principles upon which our democracy rests. From the sculpture of 
. to the statue of President Abraham Lincoln, 
the dark stone walls commemorating the Americans who died in Vietnam to 
the quiet fountains that honor the fallen of World War II, they saw 
monuments and memorials that pay tribute to the men and women who have 
sustained our country for the past 246 years. Some of the children even 
had the chance to sing patriotic songs for Veterans at the World War II 
Memorial. Back at school, students worked together to write down their 
impressions and sketch what they saw on the field trip.
, young Americans like the ones at Mt. Harmony give me 
hope for this countrys future. It is inspiring to see them take such a 
great interest in Americas civic culture and history. We all ought to 
be grateful to the educators, parents, and community leaders who gave 
them that opportunity. One day, these children will be the guardians of 
our great American experiment. They will carry on the same work of the 
historic figures they learned about on their trip--that sacred American 
duty `to form a more perfect Union. Their authorship of these books 
proves that they have already started to contribute to that crucial 
mission. For that, they have my thanks and the gratitude of the 
Congress.
, I ask all my colleagues to join me in applauding the 
students--and authors--at Mt. Harmony.
I rise today to congratulate Voices of Unity 
Youth Choir as they head to Auckland, New Zealand to compete in the 
2024 World Choir Games.
  This honor is well deserved, considering the setbacks the choir has 
faced over the last few years. Perhaps the most significant of these 
recent challenges was the departure of over 40 of their student 
participants in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic. This did not hinder 
Voices of Unity; they rallied by launching the ``Rising With Purpose 
Rebuilding Initiative, which engaged a new wave of talented Northeast 
Indiana youth.
  It was with this soulful new chorale group that Voices of Unity 
achieved this tremendous success. Unity will be representing Fort Wayne 
across the world in the Gospel Music Category of the ``Olympics of 
the chorale world. This experience will be transformational for the 
young people involved, and an ideal opportunity for them to represent 
their community, culture, and Nation to an international audience.
  I am proud that our community will be represented by this choir with 
beautiful song, and I congratulate the singers, staff, and board of 
Voices of Unity Youth Choir on their great achievement.
I include in the Record the following 
proclamation:
  Whereas: Morquio A syndrome, a classification of 
Mucopolysaccharidosis (MPS) disorders, is a rare, progressive genetic 
disorder that affects approximately 1 in every 300,000 births;
  Whereas: individuals affected by Morquio A syndrome do not have or do 
not produce enough enzymes that break down sugar chains naturally in 
the body;
  Whereas: the buildup of sugars negatively impacts the skeletal system 
and eventually the organ systems;
  Whereas the condition of Morquio A syndrome worsens over time and 
there is no cure;
  Whereas there is only one FDA-approved medication for Morquio A 
syndrome, a synthetic version of the enzyme that patients lack;
  Whereas this treatment is a four-hour weekly infusion that helps slow 
the rapid progression of the disease;
  Whereas patients receiving treatment for Morquio A syndrome often 
need to see numerous specialty doctors frequently and may also require 
many services for school-age children;
  Whereas it is imperative that there be greater awareness of this 
serious health condition, and more must be done to increase activity at 
the local, state, and national levels;
  Whereas ``Morquio A Syndrome Awareness Day is expected to be 
observed in the United States for years to come, providing hope and 
information for patients, caregivers, and families around the country: 
Now, therefore, be it
  Resolved, That the House of Representatives--
  Supports the designation of ``Morquio A Syndrome Awareness Day; and
  Recognizes the importance of, with respect to Morquio A syndrome--
  Improving awareness;
  Encouraging accurate and early diagnosis;
  Advancing research;
  Developing new treatments, diagnostics, and cures; and
  Identifying regulatory pathways for drug development of ultrarare 
diseases like Morquio A syndrome.
I rise to honor the memory of Staff Sergeant 
Ysmael R. Villegas, a distinguished American hero from Californias 
39th Congressional District. Born in Casa Blanca in 1924, Villegas, the 
eldest of 13 children, exemplified the values of our diverse community.
  Formerly an ``orange picker, Villegas answered the call to serve 
during WWII, displaying extraordinary bravery at the Battle of Luzon. 
Tragically, on March 20, 1945, one day before his 21st birthday, he 
made the ultimate sacrifice for our nation. President Truman 
posthumously awarded him the Medal of Honor on October 19, 1945.
  Colonel G. B. Appleman presented the medal to his widow at Camp Haan 
on November 1, 1945, in our very own Riverside district. The ceremony 
drew thousands, a testament to the profound impact of Villegass 
heroism on our community.
  As we commemorate what would have been his 100th birthday, let us 
remember Staff Sergeant Villegass selflessness, dedication, and love 
for family. May his legacy inspire future generations, and the heroism 
of Staff Sergeant Villegas remains etched in the history and hearts of 
Californias 39th Congressional District.
I am not recorded because I 
was unavoidably detained. Had I been present, I would have voted YEA on 
Roll Call No. 79, and NAY on Roll Call No. 80.
RECOGNIZING GEORGE MOROZS SERVICE TO THE HENRY FORD MUSEUM AND THE 
                              of michigan
I rise today to recognize George Moroz, 
the Director of External Relations and Special Assistant to the 
President at The Henry Ford Museum in Dearborn, Michigan, on the 
occasion of his retirement. His longstanding dedication to education 
and the preservation of history is worthy of commendation.
  George got his start in public service with the Detroit Symphony 
Orchestra, serving as Vice President for Development from 1989-1996. In 
that position, he was in charge of all fundraising activity and 
government relations for the organization. Armed with that experience, 
he then took up his position at The Henry Ford, where he has been a 
driving force in the growth and evolution of the museum over the last 
three decades.
  Georges passion for enriching the lives of Michiganders is 
exemplified by his 27 years of dedication to The Henry Ford and the 
broader museum community. Throughout his career George worked 
tirelessly to advocate for the importance of museums such as The Henry 
Ford and worked with museum advocates on local, state, and national 
levels. His years of advocacy resulted in the longstanding partnership 
between the Michigan Museum Association and the Tourism Industry 
Coalition of Michigan, strengthening the relationship between these 
critical cultural markers.
  George worked tirelessly for 16 years with federal and state partners 
to bring the John Dingell Transit Station to its current location 
adjacent to The Henry Ford campus, creating opportunities for visitors 
from all over the country to access this national treasure. George 
further played a pivotal role in the restoration and creation of key 
community sites such as the Greenfield Village, Rouge Oxbow, and 
Central Farmers Market Vegetable Shed that will provide enjoyment for 
generations to come.
  Recognizing a greater need for community engagement, Mr. Moroz 
created and oversaw the Diversity and Inclusion Centered Equity (DICE) 
initiative, laying the groundwork for Henry Fords DEAI programming 
that continues today. These programs have worked to ensure Henry Ford 
serves as an inclusive cultural hub and carry on Georges beliefs in 
collaboration and community building.
, I ask my colleagues to join me today in celebrating the 
many accomplishments of George Moroz over the last 30+ years. We thank 
him for his service, dedication, and leadership in advancing and 
preserving the cultural heritage of the State of Michigan, and wish him 
the best in retirement.
HAROLD ``SANDY AND CONNIE WOLFINGER AS HONOREES AT THE THIRTY-EIGHTH 
                              of new york
I rise today to recognize the civic 
leadership, philanthropy, and community service of Harold ``Sandy and 
Connie Wolfinger. In the last few years, I have come to know them 
personally as friends, and I have seen firsthand the deep connection 
they have to the community. I am glad to see that their dedication and 
passion was recognized on March 7th as honorees at the thirty-eighth 
Annual Salute to Olean banquet. Each of their stories of self-built 
business and success is a testament to the importance and hope in the 
American Dream. In return, Sandy and Connie have generously given back 
to their community through local civic leadership and philanthropy, 
which has benefited generations of students across the region.
  Harold, or Sandy as he is called by friends, was the first in his 
family to graduate from college before going into forestry where he 
worked his way up from humble beginnings in several companies before 
starting his own--Northern Forests LLC, which continues to be a success 
thirty years later. Connie is a native to the area, growing up between 
the communities of Olean, Cuba, and Portville in the heart of the 
Southern Tier of New York. She spent over thirty years herself as a 
real-estate broker, specializing in land lease and sales and formed her 
own company, Field &amp; Stream Real Estate--through which she met her 
soon-to-be husband Harold as a repeat buyer.
  The Wolfinger Family Donor Advised Fund and the Connie and Sandy 
Wolfinger Fund make possible annual grants to organizations chosen by 
the Wolfingers across education, home care, and medical assistance to 
special projects in their community. Since 2019 they are responsible 
for nearly one hundred thousand dollars in charitable grants and 
contributions affecting the daily lives of those in our community.
  Their deep network and civic mindedness also gave birth to the Right 
Thinkers--a monthly town hall for public discussion on current events 
and policy issues where two hundred or more come to listen, learn, and 
speak their minds to panels of experts and elected officials.
  The generosity and pride that Connie and Sandy have for the Southern 
Tier is tangible,

and many are better off because of their efforts. Given the above, I 
ask that this legislative body pause in its deliberations and join me 
in recognizing Harold ``Sandy and Connie Wolfinger for their decades 
of service and generosity to their community and upon being named as 
2024 Salute to Olean Honorees.