I rise today to celebrate the 10th 
Anniversary of Open Buffalo and the remarkable work they do to make our 
community a more just, equitable place for all.
  Founded in 2014, Open Buffalo is a non-profit organization dedicated 
to advancing racial, economic, and ecological justice. Open Buffalo 
works to make Western New York a community free from discrimination and 
poverty by prioritizing long-term solutions to address systemic 
inequities. Through all of its actions, Open Buffalo leads with the 
values of empathy, accountability, collaboration, and restorative 
justice.
  Open Buffalos work takes place through two main avenues--leadership 
development and advocacy. They help to create Buffalos next generation 
of skilled changemakers, hosting leadership trainings to empower our 
youth to make a positive difference in our community. Further, Open 
Buffalo has increased civic engagement in our community by giving 
individuals the platform to voice their own opinions and ideas.
  Since Open Buffalos founding, they have been a key advocate in 
social justice-based change, making a tangible impact on the lives of 
Western New Yorkers. Today, I wish to highlight their newest project, 
the Open Buffalo Ecology Center. The creation of the ``Eco Center 
will provide 10 acres of community green space on the East Side of 
Buffalo. Open Buffalo will host recreational activities and educational 
events for all in the community to participate in.
  For 10 years, Open Buffalo has conducted the grassroots work to make 
our community a more equitable place for everyone. Please join me in 
congratulating Open Buffalo on their 10th Anniversary and thanking them 
for their remarkable service.
today, I want to congratulate Mrs. Faythe 
Petersen of Norfolk, Nebraska on her retirement.
  Faythe is a longtime public servant with over 44 years of service 
with the Norfolk Fire and Rescue.
  Over decades, she supported generations of first responders both on 
call and off. She assisted with public education programs, helped plan 
for emergencies and disasters, and coordinated with local, State, and 
Federal public safety responders.
  With her efforts, Norfolk Fire and Rescue was better able to serve 
the community of Norfolk. I know she will be greatly missed in the 
department.
  On behalf of the First District of Nebraska, I thank Faythe for her 
service to the community of Norfolk, and extend best wishes to her on 
her retirement.
I rise today to commend Romeo Lucchesi, the 
Visual Information Specialist at the Lt. Col. Luke Weathers Jr. VA 
Medical Center in Memphis, for his successes in video marketing and 
film-making. Earlier this year, he won a Gold Aster Award for 
excellence in healthcare advertising for his special video production 
``A Tribute to Lt. Col. Luke Weathers Jr. Earlier this year, he also 
won an Emmy Award for his documentary video essay ``The Green Beret Who 
Fought Muhammad Ali. Lt. Col. Luke Weathers, Jr. was a Tuskegee 
Airman from Memphis. During World War II, Weathers was credited with 
shooting down German planes while protecting U.S. Army Air Corps 
bombers. As a result of his stellar flying record, he earned an Air 
Medal with 7 Clusters, the Distinguished Flying Cross, and the American 
Theater Ribbon Victory Medal WWII. After the War, he worked for the 
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and eventually returned to 
Memphis, where he continued to support African Americans in the 
military, aviation, and elsewhere. Lt. Col. Weatherss inspirational 
story moved me to introduce legislation to rename the Memphis VA after 
him. Lucchesi produced a memorial video of Lt. Col. Weathers for a 
renaming ceremony of the Memphis VA Medical Center in July 2023. ``The 
Green Beret Who Fought Muhammad Ali tells the story of Memphis native 
Henry Hooper, a Booker T. Washington High school graduate who enlisted 
in the Marines and later joined the U.S. Armys Special Forces Green 
Berets. As a Green Beret, he was invited to the U.S. Olympic Boxing 
Trials in 1960 held at San Franciscos Cow Palace, where he sparred 
with Cassius Clay, later known as Muhammad Ali, who won the Gold Medal 
in the light heavyweight division in the Rome Olympics later that year. 
Hooper describes the fight in the film, explaining that for a split 
second, he took his eyes off Ali, and got knocked down. Ali won the 
match on a technical knock out. Hooper spent 11 years on active duty, 
some of it in Vietnam, while Ali resisted the draft and was charged 
with draft evasion in a case later overturned by the U.S. Supreme 
Court. Hooper later became a Secret Service agent and was assigned 
White House duty during the Carter Administration. At a state dinner to 
which Muhammad Ali had been invited, Ali approached Hooper saying he 
was sure theyd met before. Hooper said theyd met at the Cow Palace 
and they embraced. Hoopers colleagues asked about the encounter 
because they had never heard the story of the boxing match. As Hooper 
explains it, he didnt talk about it: ``I lost. I got beat . . . but he 
(Ali) remembered. Hooper, now a retired insurance agent in Memphis, 
is finally getting the adulation as a veteran that he deserves, and it 
is thanks to Mr. Lucchesis talented filmmaking. The six-minute 
documentary can be viewed on the Medical Centers Facebook page. Romeo 
Lucchesis talent is apparent, and I am pleased that he is working at 
the Lt. Col. Luke Weathers Jr. VA Medical Center, helping to tell the 
stories and honor those who have sacrificed to protect our freedoms. I 
congratulate him on his successes and look forward to seeing what else 
he has in store for us.
today I celebrate the remarkable life and 
upcoming 100th birthday of George Howard, an African American World War 
II veteran and an esteemed resident of Lansing, Michigan. Born in 
Birmingham, Alabama on February 22, 1925, Mr. Howard has led a life of 
service, resilience, and love for his fellow man. His story is one of 
transformation, from facing adversity and discrimination to building 
meaningful and trusting relationships across racial lines.
U.S. Army Air Forces in 1943. During World War II, he served in an all-
Black unit and was responsible for handling and organizing munitions, a 
duty that often placed him under enemy fire. His bravery was 
demonstrated in key campaigns, including in Naples and the Rome-Arno 
operations in Italy, and his attachment to the 12th and 15th Air Forces 
and the Mediterranean Allied Air Force.
, including the 
European-African-Middle Eastern Campaign Medal with Bronze Star, the 
Good Conduct Medal, and the WWII Victory Medal.
  The experiences Mr. Howard had during the war affected his outlook on 
life. While serving in Italy and Switzerland, he encountered a level of 
respect and equality from Europeans that was often denied to him in the 
segregated American South. These experiences fueled his desire to 
promote equality and understanding among all people, a mission he has 
carried with him throughout his life.
  Upon returning to the United States, Mr. Howard once again faced the 
harsh realities of a segregated society. Though he had served with 
honor and integrity, he and other African American veterans were 
excluded from celebrations. Despite the lack of recognition and 
disrespectful treatment, he remained focused on the values he fought 
for during the war. He expressed deep gratitude for President Trumans 
decision to desegregate the U.S. Armed Forces in 1948, a significant 
step towards equality.
  After his military service, Mr. Howard moved to Brooklyn, New York, 
and eventually settled in Michigan, where he built a career as a 
physical therapy technician at Ingham Medical Center in Lansing. His 
professional dedication was matched by his passion for jazz music. A 
proud father of three, he and his saxophone were often exiled by his 
children to a friends basement to practice in the early days of 
developing his talent. Eventually, he was not only performing locally 
but also traveling across the country to study and listen to other jazz 
artists. At the age of 92, he realized a lifelong dream by recording 
his first CD, ``George Howard and My Jazz Brothers, thanks to the 
support of his friends.
a testament to the power of perseverance and the 
strength found in service to ones country. To this day, he strongly 
believes in the fundamental principle that all men are created equal 
and has spent his life fostering understanding and respect among 
different cultures. He is also deeply committed to ensuring that people 
learn about the significant contributions of Black soldiers who have 
served our country, from the Revolutionary War to World War II to 
today.
  It is with great respect and admiration that I recognize George 
Howards extraordinary contributions and wish him a joyous celebration 
of his 100th birthday in the United States House of Representatives.
I rise today in appreciation for a member 
of my staff for her dedicated service to the people of Kansas. Jackie 
Hunley began in my office in October of 2021 and since then has 
dedicated her time, energy, and expertise to improving the lives of the 
people of the Second Congressional District. From serving as a 
legislative correspondent and ensuring we provide thoughtful replies to 
each constituent letter to shaping our offices appropriations process 
as my legislative director, Jackie has made our office better with her 
quick wit, work ethic, and desire to serve others.
  Jackie has become an adopted Kansan during her time with our team, 
not least because she met her husband, Chance--a fellow Southeast 
Kansan, while serving on our staff. While we will miss her as she has 
moved on to serve her own home state of Iowa, I extend my deepest 
gratitude for her time of service to myself and my constituents and 
look forward to seeing her excel in her new role.
I rise to honor John Agenor Cannady, Sr., who 
peacefully passed away on Saturday, April 20, 2024, surrounded by his 
loving family at his home in Alexandria, Virginia. John, age eighty-
seven, leaves behind a legacy of love, wisdom, and service that is 
deeply cherished.
  John was a U.S. Airforce Technical Sergeant, he enlisted in the 
United States Air Force in 1954, serving with distinction in various 
locations worldwide, including Libya, Spain, Vietnam, Japan, Korea, and 
England. He also served at multiple locations within the United States, 
Nebraska, Indiana, Kansas, and North Carolina. John retired in 1977, at 
Pease AFB in Portsmouth, New Hampshire, after serving our country for 
23 years. His very noble contributions earned him numerous Air Force 
Medals, symbolizing his unwavering dedication to his country.
  Following his military service, John worked in the Intelligence 
Community, for the U.S. Government, at Raytheon/E-Systems, as an 
Electronic Technician. There, he continued to serve our National 
Security community for more than 12 years, and eventually retired with 
a total of more than 35 years of dedicated service.
  John Agenor Cannady, Sr. was preceded in death by his beloved wife, 
Antionette Cannady. He leaves behind five children, nine grandchildren, 
nine great-grandchildren and one great-great grandchild. His legacy 
lives on through his large and loving family who remember him as filled 
with profound knowledge, an enthusiastic advocate of education, a 
generous and wise man.
I rise today in appreciation for a member 
of my staff, Mike Howard, who has recently embarked on a new job off 
the Hill after nearly three years of service as my communications 
director. Mike began in my office in August of 2021, and has served 
since then as a trusted advisor who has constantly sharpened our team 
and ensured that we are able to get out the message of our work here in 
Congress to my constituents from Galena to Atchison.
  Mike has spent countless early mornings and late nights preparing 
with me for interviews, town halls, committee hearings, and making sure 
that we are able to clearly explain the work that we do here. Mike will 
be sorely missed as he moves on to this new role, but I would like to 
thank him once again for his dedication and commitment to the people of 
the Second Congressional District of Kansas.
I rise today to honor Doug Durham who 
passed away at the age of 94 on April 11, 2024. Doug served honorably 
in the United States Navy during the Korean War and continued his 
dedication to serving our country after leaving the service.
  Born in Reed City, Michigan on July 7, 1929, Doug served on the first 
ship to leave the United States for Korea, the USS Endicott DMS 25. On 
the Endicott, Doug took part in the mission to sweep mines in Hungnam 
Harbor and assist in the Christmas Miracle evacuation of 105,000 
servicemembers from the Chosin reservoir. He was honored as a Humboldt 
Hero and was selected to participate in an Honor Flight to Washington, 
D.C. to see the memorials built to honor him and others that served.
  Doug continued to serve his country in the private sector after 
leaving the Navy. He was instrumental in the development of a 
groundbreaking missile detection system during his 30-year career at 
Lockheed. His contributions to this field were invaluable. He was a 
committed patriot, but his service to this country was not purely 
through national defense.
  Doug had a passion for volunteering. He devoted much of his time to 
the Humboldt Senior Resource Center, Area 1 Agency on Aging, the 
Ingomar Club Board, and the Historical Committee. When Alzheimers 
claimed the life of Dougs spouse, Virginia, he established a caregiver 
support group to make sure that others had the help and training they 
needed to care for family members stricken by the disease.
  Doug was captivated by the beauty of our natural world and found 
solace in nature. He

was an avid hunter and fisherman. He was a strong advocate for the 
protection of salmonids and worked tirelessly with CalTrout to push for 
the enactment of policies protecting these fish and their habitat. He 
was a master rosarian and taught classes on the cultivation of roses. 
He loved spending time with his many friends. His wit, humor, and 
kindness left an indelible mark on all he met.
  Doug is survived by his sister, Judy, and preceded in death by 
Virginia, his wife of 50 years, as well as his father, Jules, mother 
Harriette, stepmother Eleanor, and sister Georgia. He is remembered as 
a loving husband and brother, a community leader, a patriot, and a dear 
friend to all who knew him.
, there is no doubt that Doug Durham was a dedicated 
public servant who will be missed and whose many contributions to 
Humboldt County and the nation are worthy of commendation. Therefore, 
it is fitting and proper that we honor his many contributions and 
express our deep condolences to his family and friends.
I rise today to recognize United States 
Air Force Brigadier General Derek M. Salmi for his critical service and 
outstanding leadership as Commander of the 60th Air Mobility Wing, 
Travis Air Force Base.
  Brigadier General Salmi commissioned from the Air Force Academy in 
1998 after earning his Bachelor of Science in political science. 
Throughout his 25-year-long career, he has

commanded at the squadron, group, and wing levels and served as a 
command pilot with more than 3,000 hours in mobility and trainer 
aircraft. In addition, he has deployed in support of Operations 
Enduring Freedom, Iraqi Freedom, and New Dawn.
  As the Travis Air Force Base 60th Air Mobility Wing Commander, 
Brigadier General Salmi led the Air Forces largest air mobility 
organization in terms of personnel and was responsible for the well-
being and readiness of more than 26,100 active-duty, reserve and 
civilian personnel, and their families. In addition, he managed $13 
billion in capital assets, executed a $650 million budget, and oversaw 
the Air Forces largest medical center in the continental United 
States. Brigadier General Salmis critical leadership and expertise not 
only made our country safer, but also helped improve the lives of the 
thousands of military and civilian personnel who work at Travis Air 
Force Base.
  Brigadier General Salmis commitment to preparing the units at Travis 
Air Force Base to respond to any potential threat characterized his 
tenure as Commander of the 60th Air Mobility Wing. He led the 60th Air 
Mobility Wing in executing two intensive joint Agile Combat Employment 
exercises in the United States Indo-Pacific Command theater of 
operations while simultaneously providing 35 percent of all Department 
of Defense logistics support to Ukraine.
  Under Brigadier General Salmis leadership, the 60th Air Mobility won 
117 United States Air Force and Air Mobility Command awards. In 
addition, he directed multiple key military construction projects that 
will make Travis Air Force Base more resilient and our country more 
secure.
  Brigadier General Salmis selfless commitment to the military 
personnel and families stationed at Travis Air Force Base has 
undeniably improved the base for future generations of servicemembers. 
On behalf of Californias Eighth Congressional District, I would like 
to extend my sincere gratitude for Brigadier General Salmis dedication 
and service to our country and community. I know Travis Air Force Base 
and the Solano County community join me in extending our best wishes as 
Brigadier General Salmi embarks on his future endeavors.
I use today to congratulate Donna M. Chiera 
on her retirement as President of the American Federation of Teachers 
New Jersey (AFTNJ). Ms. Chiera has dedicated over 40 years of service 
to the education field and her contributions and accomplishments are 
truly deserving of this bodys recognition.
  As President of AFTNJ, Donna Chiera brought a wealth of knowledge and 
experience to the position. She worked as a special education teacher 
and resource room teacher for the Perth Amboy Public School District 
for more than 30 years until her retirement from teaching in 2011. 
Furthermore, Ms. Chiera also served as president of the local union, 
Perth Amboy Federation of Teachers, from 1991 until 2013, as well as 
AFTNJ executive vice president for grades pre-K through 12. Her long-
standing involvement with AFT and her tenure as an educator exemplify 
Representing the interests of 30,000 members of AFTNJ, Ms. Chiera has 
been an active member of AFT national, chairing the Teachers program 
and policy council, serving on subcommittees, and participating in both 
the National and New Jersey Teacher of the Year selection
  In addition to her leadership of AFTNJ, Ms. Chiera is Vice President 
of the New Jersey State AFL-CIO Executive Board and previously served 
as Vice President of the Middlesex-Somerset County Central Labor 
Council, Education Chair of Perth Amboys Strategic Planning Task 
Force, and Education Co-Chair for New Jersey Governor Phil Murphys 
transition committee.
, please Join me in leading this body in acknowledgement 
of the contributions of Donna Chiera. She has tirelessly devoted her 
time to New Jerseys education and labor communities, and I am honored 
to recognize her today.
I rise today to celebrate Gloria Ortiz-
Fisher for receiving the prestigious 2024 Mid-America Regional Council 
Regional Leadership Award. Gloria has bettered the lives of countless 
people in Missouris Fifth Congressional District through her 
remarkable work as the Executive Director for the Westside Housing 
Organization. This award serves as a testament to her lifelong 
commitment to supporting her community.
  Born in Kansas City--the same city she would later serve--Gloria 
graduated from Park University with a Bachelor of Science in Accounting 
and from DeVry Universitys Keller Graduate School with an MBA. Since 
then, she boasts over 30 years of work experience in the field of 
finance, using her skills to make an impact on her fellow Kansas 
Citians. Notably, she served as the Director of Finance and Purchasing 
for Jackson County, Missouri, from

2003 to 2007 and served as a member of its environmental task force, 
promoting energy efficiency across all County departments. A naturally 
helpful and supportive person, Gloria first started working with the 
Westside Housing Organization in 2011 at the request of a friend in 
need, as there was a vacancy on the board. The rest is history.
  Glorias passion for community service and volunteerism eventually 
earned her the title of Executive Director of the Westside Housing 
Organization, which was founded on these very principles in 1973. The 
group began as Kansas City neighbors joined forces to save their 
communities from degradation and destruction, forming a local non-
profit development group now known as the Westside Housing 
Organization. With over four decades of experience, growth, and 
appreciation, the Westside Housing Organization prides itself on 
working, ``at the intersection of home, health, energy, and equity. 
It not only builds new housing in Kansas City, but also provides 
essential repair and restoration efforts to citizens who are unable to 
afford these costs.
  Though it has expanded far beyond a small group of neighbors 
repairing homes, the Westside Housing Organization has maintained the 
neighborly sentiment that founded the organization so long ago thanks 
to Glorias diligent leadership. Gloria has brought far more than 
remodeled roofs, pristine paint, or functioning furnaces to 
disadvantaged neighborhoods--she also brings care and dignity to the 
people she serves. It is through Gloria that the houses and residences 
the Westside Housing Organization works on become homes and 
communities.
  Glorias impact on communities is as wide-reaching as it is 
essential. Beginning with her work for Jackson County, Gloria has 
worked tirelessly to address ongoing climate concerns and their harsh 
impact on housing for underprivileged populations. She constantly 
advocates for sustainability and environmentally friendly housing 
initiatives, saving lower-income households major costs. Her push for 
climate sustainability extends beyond her job requirements. Only a year 
into her role as Executive Director, the Westside Housing Organization 
was granted with a ``Green Designation from NeighborWorks America for 
being committed to sustainability. Gloria also serves as Commissioner 
of the Mayors Energy Task Force, promoting environmental consciousness 
throughout the city.
  Gloria pours her heart and soul into bettering the lives of Kansas 
Citians--whether that be in or out of the professional sphere. In her 
free time, she serves as a mentor for young Latino students in the 
University of Missouri-Kansas Citys Avanzado program and is an active 
member and Community Leader of the Christ Community Church. Her record 
of relentless service reminds me of Hebrews 13:16:--``And do not forget 
to do good and to share with others, for with such sacrifices God is 
pleased. Gloria continues to serve as a shining example of helping 
others in need, and I am filled with pride at her commitment to 
service.
  With Glorias devotion to the people of Kansas City, I cannot think 
of a more deserving recipient of the 2024 MARC Regional Leadership 
Award. Recipients of this award have embodied excellence and made 
meaningful contributions to the Greater Kansas City region. As a former 
recipient of this award, I am incredibly pleased to have Ms. Ortiz-
Fisher join the cohort of those who have been granted this honor for 
their leadership and service, and I am honored to share this award with 
her. May this achievement express the profound appreciation the people 
of Kansas City, including myself, have for her. Gloria is truly a 
neighbor for all Kansas Citians and will continue to have a remarkable 
living legacy in this city--one that will be felt for generations.
today, I want to recognize Major Russell 
Bartholow for his 17 years of service with the Nebraska Army National 
Guard.
  Russell Bartholow joined the Nebraska Army National Guard in 2007, 
motivated to do something for our country and for this world.
  In 2008, he was sent to Afghanistan, where he spent 22 months serving 
as the head of a five-person ``Effects Cell. He was responsible for 
developing and conducting civil-military projects in the nine northern 
Afghanistan provinces. His team completed 31 projects, including 
providing innocent children with clothes, food and toys.
  Major Bartholow always went above and beyond what was asked of him. 
When he saw the innocent children, he worked hard to find them a safe 
place to play. He was able to negotiate with Afghan businessmen and 
elders to raise over $200,000 in funding for a park. This park included 
a soccer field, basketball court and merry-go-rounds and provided an 
oasis of hope and safety for the kids affected by war.
  His heart for service and dedication to the children and civilians 
are further seen in his being awarded the Bronze Star Medal for his 
coordination of $12 million in funding for roads, schools and clinics.

  After his time in Afghanistan, Bartholow was promoted to Captain. In 
2018, he was promoted to the rank of Major in the Nebraska Army 
National Guard.
  During his years of service, Major Bartholow has also been awarded 
the Combat Action Badge and the Army Achievement Medal.
  Major Russell Bartholow will be retiring in June 2024.
  On behalf of the First District of Nebraska, I thank Major Bartholow 
for his service and extend best wishes on his retirement.
I rise today to recognize the work of Joey 
Chiang, the current president of the Taiwanese Chambers of Commerce of 
North America (TCCNA). Mr. Chiang works tirelessly to lead the TCCNA in 
their mission to support and connect Taiwanese business members in 
North America.
  TCCNA was established in 1986 as a non-profit organization. TCCNA 
encompasses thirty-five regional chambers primarily composed of 
Taiwanese immigrants. These regional chambers span the U.S. and Canada, 
including major metropolitan areas such as Los Angeles, New York, and 
here in the nations capital. Under the careful stewardship of past 
presidents, TCCNA has grown into the largest transnational civilian 
organization in North America. Serving as a vital platform for 
communication between Taiwanese businesses in North America and the 
Taiwanese government, TCCNA regularly advocates for the importance of 
bilateral U.S.-Taiwan trade relations. As of June 22, 2024, the TCCNA 
is celebrating its 36th annual meeting of the board of directors. This 
impressive milestone is a testament to the dedication and passion that 
TCCNA members bring to their organization.
  TCCNA would not be what it is today without the guidance of President 
Joey Chiang. Mr. Chiang, a talented developer in his own right, has led 
TCCNA to gather forty new directors under his term. His expert hand 
brought TCCNA great success in their annual Washington DC Door Knocking 
Event, where the organization visited over fifty members of Congress. 
Furthermore, Mr. Chiang is not only a talented and successful leader 
but a generous benefactor. During the COVID-19 pandemic, he personally 
arranged and donated millions of masks from Taiwan to the United States 
for frontline workers. Mr. Chiangs zeal, generosity, and expert 
governance has significantly enhanced economic and cultural exchanges 
between Taiwan and the U.S.
, I ask that my colleagues in the House join me in 
commemorating the dedication of Joey Chiang, a man responsible for 
advancing Taiwanese-American commercial relations.