I rise today to recognize and congratulate El 
Gallo Bakery on their 75th anniversary of doing business in 
Californias 34th Congressional District.
  El Gallo Bakery is an outstanding small business in East Los Angeles 
that exemplifies the entrepreneurial spirit of small businesses. 
Founded by Magdalena Martinez de Huerta on February 2, 1949, 5 years 
after immigrating to East Los Angeles from Guadalajara, Jalisco, 
Mexico.
  El Gallo Bakery was passed down to Mr. Jesus Huerta, the son of 
Magdalena Martinez de Huerta. Mr. Huerta became the owner at 18 years 
old in 1984 and has transformed El Gallo Bakery into a staple of the 
East Los Angeles community.
, 
enriching the cultural tapestry and creating a legacy of delicious 
memories and culinary excellence.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in honoring and 
celebrating El Gallo Bakery on its 75th anniversary. Congratulations 
again on reaching this impressive milestone. I wish them continued 
success and heres to the next 75 years.
I rise today to wish Dave Cole and Isles Pub 
&amp; Pizza a very happy 40th anniversary.
  Established in 1984, Dave Cole turned an old Italian restaurant into 
a community favorite pizza kitchen with the help of many dedicated 
friends.
  After a customer led naming contest for the business, the restaurant 
became ``The Isles Pub &amp; Pizza, more oftenly called ``The Isles.
  Since then, Isles Pub &amp; Pizza has grown and distinguished itself in 
many ways. Cole and company have dedicated hours of their time curating 
the perfect pizza sauce for their customers.
  Many local community leaders consider Isles Pub &amp; Pizza to be some of 
the best pizza in the area. Cole and his staff have continued to 
provide quality food and excellent service for 40 years.
  Isles Pub &amp; Pizza have been recognized with many achievements 
including Lincolns recent 2024 Choice Award.
  As Dave Cole and Isles Pub &amp; Pizza reach their 40th anniversary, 
there is much to celebrate.
  On behalf of the people of Nebraskas First Congressional District, I 
congratulate them on 40 years and wish them fun as they celebrate this 
incredible milestone.
CONGRATULATING OAK KNOLL SCHOOL OF THE HOLY CHILDS 100TH ANNIVERSARY
I rise today to extend my 
warmest congratulations to the Oak Knoll School of the Holy Child on 
their 100th anniversary. I am truly grateful to be celebrating this 
monumental milestone with you all. The Oak Knoll School of the Holy 
Child was founded by the Society of the Holy

Child Jesus and has been at the forefront of empowering students not 
only academically but also in personal growth and social 
responsibility. Over the past 100 years, Oak Knoll has fostered a 
welcoming diverse student body of inquisitive students who think 
critically, embrace knowledge, respond with moral and ethical 
integrity, and make responsible choices that enrich their own lives and 
contribute to the lives of others. The Oak Knoll school has maintained 
a steadfast commitment to integrating faith with education, promoting a 
community of compassionate and informed citizens who are ready to lead 
and serve in a global society. The past 100 years have served as a 
reflection of the vibrant legacy that will continue to inspire and 
shape future generations. The Oak Knoll School of the Holy Child has 
stood as a testament to a centurys worth of educational innovation, 
resilience, and dedication. May the schools next 100 years be filled 
with as much success as the past 100 years.
I rise to recognize Santa Clara County 
Supervisor Cindy Chavez, who has dedicated her career to serving the 
residents of District 2 in Santa Clara County.
  Supervisor Cindy Chavez represents approximately 500,000 individuals 
in one of the most densely populated areas of our county. Sworn into 
office in August 2013 after a special election, Supervisor Chavez has 
been re-elected twice. She has been committed and effective in her 
leadership.
  Supervisor Cindy Chavez was a leader in the establishment of the 
Childrens Health Initiative and helped champion efforts that resulted 
in the County of Santa Clara to become the first county in the nation 
to assure health care for every child living in the County.
  Supervisor Cindy Chavez has made significant strides in ensuring that 
Santa Clara County remains an affordable, safe, and engaging community 
for all. Her leadership on the CalTrain Board of Directors has been 
pivotal in advancing the electrification of CalTrain and planning for a 
highspeed rail. A commissioner on the Metropolitan Transportation 
Commission and a board member of the Valley Transportation Authority, 
she actively addresses regional transportation needs.
  In 2016, she led Measure A, a landmark $950 million housing bond that 
has funded nearly 5,000 units of affordable housing, prioritizing 
vulnerable communities in Santa Clara County. Additionally, Chavez is a 
statewide leader, championing programs for survivors of sexual assault 
and human trafficking, securing a 400 percent increase in funding for 
essential services for survivors.
  She has tirelessly worked to expand public services and create 
community partnerships, including the establishment of the Vietnamese 
American Service Center, the first of its kind in the Nation.
  In closing, Supervisor Cindy Chavez exemplifies public service 
through her dedication to improving lives in Santa Clara County. Her 
innovative policies and advocacy have set a standard for community 
leadership, making her a vital asset to our community, addressing 
pressing social issues. It has been a privilege to work alongside her, 
and I am proud to call her my friend.
I rise today to honor the memory of Joe 
Stires and to celebrate his legacy of service.
  Joe Stires began his lifetime of service to our community when he 
joined the United States Air Force, immediately after finishing high 
school. He served our community honorably in the Air Force for nearly a 
decade. It was during this time that he met his life partner, Matilde.
  After leaving the military, Joe took on challenge after challenge. 
After working as an insurance agent in Chaparral, Stires eventually 
opened his own grocery store. This store became a huge success, leading 
him to open many more stores. Throughout his career, Joe never lost his 
heart for service and giving back to his community. In his spare time, 
he became a licensed EMT and eventually a paramedic. He used these 
certifications to serve as a firefighter for the Chaparral Volunteer 
Fire Department for nearly 25 years. His exposure to loud sirens during 
this period led to

significant hearing loss, but Joe was willing to sacrifice his own 
health for those around him.
  Joe was a well-known pillar of his community and was there to lend a 
hand to anyone who was in need. He would help people that did not have 
food and people who could not pay their bills. Joe never hesitated to 
support his community with time, money or labor. His loved ones say 
that he viewed his community as an extension of his family, fondly 
sharing stories about the time he helped deliver a baby at his grocery 
store. Joe wanted nothing more than to share love and family, and if we 
all cared about out communities the way that he did, the world would be 
a much brighter place.
  On this day, I would like to celebrate Joe Stires as a veteran, a 
volunteer firefighter and as a pillar in our community who dedicated 
himself to a life of giving. His service has made his community and New 
Mexico a better place.
  On behalf of the great people of New Mexicos 2nd Congressional 
District, I thank Joe Stires, for all he has done for us.
I am honored to recognize the 
dedicated career of Mr. Grady Bourn as he embarks on his well-deserved 
retirement after 25 years of exemplary service in the United States 
House of Representatives. As my Legislative Director, Grady has been a 
cornerstone of legislative expertise, driven by an unwavering passion 
for improving the lives of everyday Americans during his many years in 
my office.
  Grady began his journey on Capitol Hill a quarter of a century ago in 
the office of former House Appropriations Chairman Jerry Lewis. From 
there, his tireless dedication to integrity and even-keeled leadership 
brought him to my team, where he has been an indispensable asset. I 
have been blessed to call Grady a part of Team Carter, and his profound 
influence on my legislative agenda has been felt across a wide range of 
issues.
  As Legislative Director, Grady has been instrumental in shaping our 
efforts to pass high-quality legislation that protects the homeland, 
stands up for Americas veterans, and upholds the rule of law. His 
contributions have directly improved the lives of Americans from all 
walks of life. His commitment to ensuring the success of every policy 
detail has been nothing short of remarkable.
  Beyond his legislative prowess, Gradys leadership and mentorship 
have left an indelible mark on those fortunate enough to work with him. 
His steady guidance has not only influenced my staff but also touched 
staff members across the House, regardless of political affiliation. 
His dedication to nurturing the next generation of public servants will 
undoubtedly leave a legacy in the halls of Congress.
  As Grady embarks on this new chapter in his life. I want to express 
my deepest gratitude for his immense contributions to Team Carter and 
to the United States House of Representatives. His service, leadership, 
and dedication to excellence will be remembered long after his 
departure.
  On behalf of the United States House of Representatives, I extend my 
heartfelt thanks to Mr. Grady Bourn for his 25 years of distinguished 
service, and I wish him all the best as he enters a well-earned 
retirement. His dedication to public service will be greatly missed by 
all who had the honor of working alongside him.
I rise today to mourn the loss of 
Vernon ``Leon Davis.
  Leon Davis was a firefighter for over 30 years in Blackshear, 
Georgia. Mr. Davis worked his way up to Assistant Fire Chief of 
Blackshear while serving part time over his expansive 30-year career.
  Sadly, Davis passed in the line of duty while helping his Blackshear 
community during Hurricane Helene.
  This Hurricane has hit Georgia and the Southeast region of United 
States hard. Without the tremendous efforts and service of people like 
, our communities would not be able to recover.
, family, 
and all the people he worked with throughout his career. He has deeply 
touched the Blackshear community and will be greatly missed by many.
  Our community is forever indebted to Mr. Daviss service, and I send 
my deepest condolences to his family and friends.
I rise today to recognize a remarkable 
constituent, Betty Stout of Pennswood Village in Newtown. Betty was 
born on September 30, 1923, in Trenton. N.J., and is now turning 101.
  Betty was known during her childhood in Trenton as the ``The Little 
Mother of Rutherford Avenue, because of the long hours she spent 
caring for her younger brother, Gary. Her father worked even longer 
hours, leading a band, playing the organ in local movie theaters, and 
delivering newspapers before the crack of dawn.
  After graduating from Trenton High, Betty worked for the Trenton 
Banking Company. She married Ralph Stout, who also worked there, in 
1947. Ralph had a liberating effect on her life, mainly by encouraging 
her do many of the things she had not been able to do as a child. They 
were wonderful dancers and excelled at bridge. Betty learned to swim 
and play golf, a sport that gave her great pleasure until she was 90. 
She was an active member of the Hopewell Valley Golf Club for 50 years. 
One of her grandchildren jokes she even looked down on the 9-holers.
  Betty was a member of Ewing Presbyterian Church for many years before 
joining Lawrenceville Presbyterian Church. She now attends services at 
Pennswood. She volunteered with the Childrens Committee of Mercer 
Hospital. Betty is adored by her three children, seven grandchildren 
and seven great-grandchildren. At her 100th birthday party, one of the 
grandchildren described her as the hub of the familys wheel. At the 
age of 94, she served as the celebrant at another grandchilds wedding.
  At Pennswood, Betty is surrounded by loving friends and staff. To be 
her friend or a spoke on her familys wheel is a rare, and always 
rewarding privilege. To be on the Pennswood staff is often to become 
her friend. Her capacity for friendship is matched by her passion for 
setting wrongs right. Happy Birthday, Betty.
I am honored to present Earnest Wayne 
Barron, of Huntsville, Texas, with a Congressional Veteran 
Commendation. His servant life reflects the hard work and dedication 
that exemplify the best of our East Texas values.
  Earnest Barron entered active duty at Corpus Christi, Texas, in April 
of 1966 at twenty years of age. Earnest served with honor during the 
Vietnam War, setting the stage for a life of hard work and service to 
his family, country, and veteran brothers. Earnest served for four 
years overseas in the Vietnam War, first as a combat medic in country 
and then on board the USS Repose, which was used as an offshore 
hospital to treat those with the worst injuries, including soldiers and 
civilians. He was a dependable, trustworthy, and resourceful Corpsman, 
all hallmarks of what the Navy needed for this duty. With a 
compassionate heart, Earnest learned to be a skilled first responder in 
a combat environment. He saw the worst of the worst but kept his wits 
while serving to assist some of the best medical professionals in 
getting our soldiers well.
  Earnest completed Basic Military Requirements to be a Hospital 
Corpsman, trained for Petty Officer 2nd and 3rd Class, was 
professionally recommended for Hospital Corpsman 3rd Class, completed 
the Military Leadership Class for E-4/5 status, ECC for Hospital 
Corpsman, and Navy Hospital `A School. Petty Officer Barron was 
rewarded many times and recognized by earning the National Defense 
Medal, Vietnam Service Medal with one Bronze Star, and the Vietnam 
Campaign Medal.
  After serving in Vietnam, Earnest married Donna, and in his 
professional career, he has worked for Armco Steel, the Texas 
Department of Criminal Justice, the University of Texas Medical Branch, 
and for Carnes Funeral Home through his business, First Call Mortuary 
Transport, which transported bodies across Texas and the rest of the 
Nation, upholding the last wishes and requests of families of the 
deceased with great care.
  In retirement, Earnest is a member of VFW Post 5871, serves as a 
trustee at his church, and still serves as a valued volunteer at the 
H.E.A.R.T.S. Veterans Museum. There, he still maintains the title of 
`most favored tour guide, doing his best to go above and beyond in 
helping visitors understand what it was truly like to serve. The 
children especially love his tours as he dresses them up in helmets, 
vests, and unique wooden `weapon replicas he had made for a more 
authentic experience. Earnest is also the museum photographer and 
videographer and has spent many years capturing the stories of veterans 
that visit the museum. As Earnest gives precious time at the museum, he 
and Donna make time to give back to their community with needs outside 
of the museum through their church and community. Earnest has been 
known to go above and beyond for his neighbors in need, delivering 
groceries and necessities when he finds out they have none.
  It is with this level of care for his fellow man that I proudly 
commend Earnest Wayne Barron of Huntsville, Texas, to his friends, 
family, and colleagues, and salute his service to the Navy and Walker 
County by awarding him the 2024 Congressional Veteran Commendation.
I rise today to congratulate 
and celebrate Jason Sodano, who has been honored with the prestigious 
2024 William M. Usdane Award that recognizes outstanding achievement 
and exceptional character by an employee with a disability.
  SourceAmerica confers this award as part of its AbilityOne Program, 
which leverages federal procurement to create job opportunities for 
Americans with disabilities through the nonprofit organizations that 
employ them.
  Jason overcame his developmental disability and earned both his high 
school diploma and an associates degree in office technology.
  His perseverance helped him land a job with New Leaf, a participating 
nonprofit in the AbilityOne Program that operates at Naval Air Station 
Whidbey Island, Washington.
  For the past 13 years, Jason has worked on the naval base as a 
janitor.
  Jasons supervisors, colleagues and family praise his commitment to 
excellence and his positive attitude that seems to brighten the 
workplace and inspire those around him.
  Along the way, Jason has earned awards for perfect attendance and 
exceeding quality standards by ensuring cleanliness for up to 1,700 
military personnel at NAS Whidbey Island.
  Jason exemplifies the American spirit in overcoming adversity. His 
journey from struggling with standardized tests to becoming a valued 
employee at New Leaf is a testament to his resilience and 
determination.
  He has shown that regardless of the challenges one faces, it is 
possible to achieve great success through hard work and a positive 
attitude.
, please join me in extending heartfelt congratulations to 
Jason Sodano for his well-deserved recognition with the 2024 William M. 
Usdane Award.
  Jasons dedication and achievements are an inspiration to us all. May 
he continue to excel and make profound impacts in his workplace and 
beyond.
I am honored to present retired USAF 
Master Sergeant Bobby Dean Broneske, of Huntsville, Texas, with a 
Congressional Veteran Commendation. His servants life reflects the 
hard work and dedication that exemplifies the best of our East Texas 
values.
  Bobby Broneske entered active duty in Boston, Massachusetts in 
February of 1981 at eighteen years of age. Bobby served honorably 
through peacetime and a lengthy and volatile period in the Gulf War 
including Operation Desert Storm, Operation Desert Shield and the 
Liberation of Kuwait. Bobby is a highly decorated airman.
  Bobby was trained and served as an Electronic Warfare Systems 
Craftsman, and during the Gulf War, he operated from Kuwait and Saudi 
Arabia ensuring the safety and effectiveness of aircraft, their crews 
and completion of their missions guiding their every move. Bobby was 
required to operate at a technically high level operating sophisticated 
systems given the precision and coordination of coalition forces and 
their individual missions. This element was critical for success and 
Bobby and his fellow airmen performed admirably allowing the U.S. and 
Coalition Forces to attain their objectives with great and quick 
success.
  In his twenty years of service, Bobby completed Basic Training, the 
NCO Orientation Course and the NCO Academy. Through service and combat 
duty, Bobby was awarded the Air Force Commendation Medal with one 
device, Air Medal, Aerial Achievement Medal with 13 devices, Air Force 
Longevity Service Award with four devices, Air Force Training Ribbon, 
Southwest Asia Service Medal with three devices, Armed Forces Service 
Medal, Air Force Overseas Short and Long Tour Ribbons with one device, 
National Defense Service Medal, Humanitarian Service Medal with two 
devices, Small Arms Expert Marksmanship Ribbon with one device, Combat 
Readiness Medal with three devices, NCO Professional Military Education 
Ribbon, Armed Forces Expeditionary Medal with one device (Provide 
Hope)(Provide Promise), NATO Medal, Kuwait Liberation Medal (Kuwait), 
Kuwait Liberation Medal (Saudi Arabia), Air Force Outstanding Unit 
Award with Valor with seven devices, Joint Meritorious Unit Award, Air 
Force Good Conduct Medal with five devices, and the Meritorious Service 
Medal.
  After retiring from the Air Force, Bobby continued his service to his 
brothers and community by serving on the New Hampshire Veteran Advisory 
Board and after working his way up, he served as Commander of the 
Combat Veteran Motorcycle Association (CVMA). Eventually Bobby made his 
way to Texas as fast as he could and currently serves as Commander of 
the local chapter of the Combat Veteran Motorcycle Association. Bobby 
also serves as an officer with VFW Post 5871, board member for the 
H.E.A.R.T.S. Veterans Museum and makes himself available to any local 
Veterans advocacy groups raising money and helping to achieve their 
goals. When a Veteran calls, Bobby is there and takes them to the 
doctors office or provide emergency funds, Bobby finds a way.
  It is with this level of loyalty and care for his fellow man and 
Veteran brothers, that I proudly commend retired USAF Master Sergeant 
Bobby Dean Broneske of Huntsville, Texas to his friends, family, and 
colleagues, and salute his service to the Air Force, and Walker County 
by awarding him the 2024 Congressional Veteran Commendation.
Im honored to recognize the Mechanicsburg 
Lions Club on their 75th Anniversary.
  Chartered in 1949, the Mechanicsburg Lions Club has provided 
continuous service to our local community and the Lions International 
organization--fostering a spirit of understanding among people for 
humanitarian needs by providing voluntary services through community 
involvement and international cooperation. In some of their recent 
work, the Mechanicsburg Lions Club supported the Operation Wildcat 
Project Clothing initiative, volunteered at One80 Ministries preparing 
their new transitional living space, and volunteered for Pink Hands of 
Hope during a last-minute emergency cleanup. The organization also 
supports Boys Little League Baseball and Girls Softball leagues, Red 
Cross Blood Drives, Meals on Wheels, subsidizes eyeglasses and hearing 
aids for needy adults and children, supported the Silver Spring 
Township Veterans Memorial, and myriad other worthy causes.
  In recent years, with more than 50 members, the Mechanicsburg Lions 
Club has raised and distributed approximately $40,000 to help local and 
worldwide charities--proving an indispensable Godsend to our community. 
Every penny the Club collects is distributed to those in need, and the 
administration of the Club and international organization is provided 
for through modest annual dues, which provides maximum charitable 
impact. Their work focuses on alleviating humanitarian crises, hunger, 
childhood cancer, and support of many other critical needs truly makes 
our communities, Commonwealth, the United States, and the world a 
better place.
, Im privileged to recognize the Mechanicsburg Lions Club 
on their 75th Anniversary. Their work is the standard by which we 
should all be judged, and I wish their organization and selfless 
members Godspeed on their future missions.
I rise today to thank and honor Rosemount 
Police Sergeant Shawn McMenomy for his courageous service during the 
tragic February 18th incident in Burnsville, MN which lost officers 
Matthew Ruge and Paul Elmstrand and firefighter/paramedic Adam Finseth.
  Sergeant McMenomy provided mutual aid support to Burnsville and was 
in the Bearcat and helped extract the mortally wounded officers and the 
rest of the Burnsville staff that were on scene. Sergeant McMenomy 
joined the South Metro SWAT team in 2018 and is currently serving as a 
Team Leader for the team that handles critical incidents across Dakota 
and Rice County.
  A Hastings native, Sergeant McMenomy began his service with the 
Rosemount Police Department in 2011 and was previously a park ranger 
and correctional officer for Dakota County. He has served as a patrol 
officer, on the departments crime scene team, as an advisor for the 
police Explorer program and was promoted to Sergeant in 2015 assigned 
as a detective.
  Im grateful for Sergeant McMenomys service to Rosemount, Burnsville 
and Minnesota. He represents the best of law enforcement and it is a 
privilege to represent him in Congress.
I would like to acknowledge the incredible 
life and legacy of an 8th-generation Alabamian who exemplifies the 
notion of a life lived in service to his community and his country.
B. French, Jr., known as Bob to those who are fortunate 
enough to know him, hails from a family of American patriots who

served in the American Revolutionary War. Upon completion of their 
service, Mr. Frenchs descendants settled in Madison County, Alabama.
  Growing up in Decatur, Alabama, Bob graduated from Decatur High 
School in 1952 before attending the University of North Alabama. Bob 
knew service to his country was important to him, leading him to attend 
the United States Military Academy Preparatory School in Newburg, New 
York. From there, he attended the University of Alabama where he earned 
his bachelors degree and went on to receive his law degree from the 
University of Alabama School of Law.
  Bob went on to serve in the United States Air Force during the Korean 
Conflict as a communications operator in the intelligence field. For 
his efforts, he received three medals and an Honorable Discharge after 
completing his service.
  Bob, using his law degree, has published a multitude of papers in 
addition to his outstanding accomplishments as a trial Lawyer. He has 
tried some of the most famous cases in Alabama history. Before 2001, 
Bob maintained a caseload that included more than 100 cases a year.
  Perhaps his biggest accomplishment was marrying his late wife, 
Celeste. Together, Bob and Celeste raised three wonderful children: 
daughters Michelle and Tammy, and son Tommy. Tommy and his wife Sandra 
Kay are the parents of two grandchildren, Trevor French and Victoria 
French Ignacio. Tammy is the mother of Bobs third grandchild, Katie 
Prewitt. Bob and Celeste were dedicated members of the First Baptist 
Church of Fort Payne. For 36 years, Bob taught a bible class at the 
church that consistently saw more than 100 members attend.
  Bobs call to be a spiritual guide to others was realized when he 
began teaching a college-level class on spiritual development. Guiding 
those who took his class by proclaiming the teachings of Jesus Christ 
led Bob to complete a six-volume work expanding on the Gospels found in 
the Bible.
  As counsel to the DeKalb County Board of Education, Bob was lead 
counsel in Americas foremost school prayer case. The United States 
Supreme Court decided this case, which allowed student-initiated prayer 
in public schools.
  Bob has received numerous awards through his church, civic 
organizations, his profession, and other organizations.
  I am honored, not only to represent, but to also recognize such an 
incredible individual and great American. He is a shining example of 
the accomplishments that can be realized when life is built on hard 
work and great faith.
  This Nation is blessed by men such as Robert B. French, Jr. and we as 
a Nation are thankful for his dedication to making Alabama and the 
United States a better place to live. We wish him many, many years of 
success and congratulate him on his retirement.