I rise today to celebrate the 
100th Anniversary of the Buffalo Chapter of the New York State Society 
of Certified Public Accountants (NYCPA). Since its founding on February 
5, 1925, the Buffalo Chapter of NYCPA has been a pillar of Western New 
Yorks professional and civic life. Visionaries like Mr. Luther K. 
Watkins, Mr. William J. Gunnell, and Mr. Edward C. Gruen joined 
together with a group of dedicated Certified Public Accountants to 
build a local organization where accounting professionals could connect 
and collaborate. Their vision created a foundation that continues to 
thrive today.
  Now, a full century later, the NYCPA Buffalo Chapter has become one 
of the most dynamic and active in New York State, proudly serving 
members across Allegany, Cattaraugus, Chautauqua, Erie, Genesee, 
Niagara, Orleans, and Wyoming Counties. Under the leadership of Chapter 
President Ms. Mindy Rose Elinski, and following in the impressive 
footsteps of past presidents, the Buffalo Chapter continues to embody 
the spirit of collaboration, mentorship, and community that its 
founders have worked tirelessly to establish.
  Through events like Buffalo Educational Night and New CPA 
Celebration, the Buffalo Chapter brings together students, educators, 
and career professionals to celebrate academic excellence and career 
achievement. The New York State Society of Certified Public Accountants 
Buffalo Chapter has been a source of support, growth, and inspiration 
for generations. The Buffalo Chapter has consistently worked to engage 
everyone from high school students to reirees, ensuring the accounting 
profession remains resilient, inclusive, and future-focused.
  What makes the New York State Society of Certified Public Accountants 
Buffalo Chapter so special is not just its professional excellence, but 
its heart. As we celebrate 100 years of their Buffalo chapter, let us 
recognize their success and contributions to Western New York. Their 
work reminds us that when we invest in people, nurture talent, mentor 
the next generation, and support each other, we all benefit together.
I rise today to honor and celebrate the life 
of one of Lincolns cornerstones: Cathy Blythe.
  Growing up in Lincoln, Cathy quickly knew that she wanted to pursue a 
career in broadcasting. She got her start at KFOR in 1972 and worked 
her way up to eventually become the co-host of the KFOR Morning Show.
  Over the years, Cathy touched the hearts of all who tuned in. Her 
stories and wit cemented her reputation, which was only rivaled by her 
active involvement in local charities and nonprofits.
  Cathys dedication, talent, and integrity were recognized with her 
induction into the Nebraska Broadcasters Association Hall of Fame in 
2011.
  Cathy will be deeply missed by all of us--especially by the 
generations of listeners who enjoyed her broadcasts before her 
retirement. Our hearts and prayers go out to her loved ones as we all 
celebrate the life of one of Lincolns brightest lights.
I rise today to celebrate Ms. 
Vanessa Quinn, R.N., a distinguished nurse, union leader, advocate, and 
trailblazer from Niagara Falls, New York. Her lifes work is a 
testament to service, compassion and commitment to Justice and 
community advancement.
A proud graduate of SUNY Erie, Ms Quinn was part of its first 
graduating class of Registered Nurses--a landmark moment in the 
colleges history. For nearly four decades, she has served with 
excellence at Kenmore Mercy Hospital, where her clinical expertise, 
care and professionalism have earned the respect of colleagues and 
recognition from countless patients. Her influence extends well beyond 
the hospital, as vice president of Communications Workers of America 
Local 1199 and a dedicated member of the New York State Safe Staffing 
Committee; she has been a tireless advocate for safe patient care, 
equitable working conditions, and the rights of healthcare workers 
across the state.
  Her leadership was essential during the CWA strike at Mercy Hospital, 
where she fought for union members rights and engaged directly with 
local, state, and federal elected officials. Thanks to her leadership, 
the hardworking employees at Mercy earned a hard-won contract with 
improved compensation and safer working conditions, benefiting patients 
and workers alike.
  In addition to her advocacy, Ms. Quinn is a beloved member of her 
local community and Episcopal church where she is spiritually guided by 
Father Curry and Bishop Michael Curly. Her unwavering dedication to 
helping other is reflected in her generous support providing food, 
housing, clothing, and transportation to those in need.
, Vanessa Quinns legacy is defined by courage, advocacy, 
service, and compassion. I ask that I be joined in honoring the 
remarkable life and enduring contributions of Ms. Vanessa Quinn, RN., a 
proud daughter of Niagara Falls, New York, a devoted servant to her 
community, and an inspiring leader whose impact will be felt for 
generations to come.
I rise today to honor Ms. Bethany Moy, for 
her work as an intern serving in my D.C. office. I would like to take 
this opportunity to thank her for her hard work and recognize the 
meaningful contributions she has made to the office this fall.
  Bethany is from Elmsford, New York, and recently graduated from 
American University, earning her Masters of International Affairs. 
Bethany is a graduate of Gordon College and majored in History with a 
minor in Political Science.
  Interns work with staff to serve constituents in North Carolinas 
11th congressional district. Bethany was chosen from a competitive pool 
of applicants and exceeded every expectation with her positive attitude 
and impressive work ethic.
  It was a pleasure to work with Bethany, and I am so proud to have had 
such an intelligent and ambitious intern representing my office. 
Bethany exemplified the spirit of public service and represents the 
best that our Nation has to offer. I congratulate Bethany on the 
successful completion of her internship and thank her on behalf of the 
people of Western North Carolina.
I rise today to honor the life of Jeremy 
Zavitz, a dedicated educator, loving husband, and devoted father who 
touched the lives of so many in our community. Mr. Zavitz passed away 
on February 22, 2025, after a 24-year fight with brain cancer, but his 
legacy will live on in the hearts of all who knew him.
a proud graduate of Orono 
High School. He later attended the University of St. Thomas, where he 
earned a degree in history and teaching. Initially, Mr. Zavitz embarked 
on a career in real estate and business development but ultimately 
found his calling in education. In 2012, Mr. Zavitz began his tenure at 
DeLaSalle High School as a social studies teacher, where his vibrant 
spirit, unwavering dedication, and passion for teaching radiated.
  Known for his energetic and engaging classes, Mr. Zavitz had the 
unique ability to transform lessons into powerful stories that 
captivated his students. His approach to teaching was rooted in 
authenticity and compassion, making every student feel welcome, valued, 
and heard. Colleagues and students alike remember him not just for his 
knowledge and dedication to teaching but also for his commitment to 
living a life of purpose.
  Jeremy is survived by his loving wife, Maud Zavitz, and their 7-year-
old son, Edmund John Zavitz. He leaves behind a legacy not only through 
his family but through the generations of students who carry forward 
his lessons of kindness, authenticity, and perseverance.
, Jeremy Zavitz was a true example of what it means to 
lead a life of service to others, and his impact on DeLaSalle High 
School, his community in South Minneapolis, and his family will never 
be forgotten. Today, we honor his memory and express our deepest 
condolences to his family and all who were fortunate enough to know 
him.
I am honored to have the opportunity to 
rise today to join family, friends, and parishioners in paying tribute 
to Monsignor Robert Tucker, as he celebrates his 55th pastoral 
anniversary with a special Mass at the Abbey of Regina Laudis in 
Bethlehem, Connecticut.
  Born in Torrington, Monsignor Tucker attended St. Francis School and 
Torrington High School before pursuing the priesthood at St. Thomas 
Seminary and St. Bonaventure University. Following his ordainment by 
Archbishop Whelan in 1970, he served parishes in Meriden, Simsbury, and 
New Britain where he served in various youth ministries as well as 
archdiocesan vocation director. However, it was at St. Anthony of Padua 
in Litchfield where he found his pastoral home and where he spent a 
majority of his pastoral career. In addition to his duties at St. 
Anthony of Padua, Monsignor Tucker became pastor of both St. Thomas of 
Villanova Church in Goshen and Our Lady of Grace Church in Bantam. In 
2017 his steadfast faith and deep commitment to his congregants led all 
three parishes through a restructuring, bringing them under the 
umbrella of St. Louis de Montfort Parish Corporation. Over his more 
than fifty years of ministry, he has earned the respect and admiration 
of his parishioners and the community which is why it was so fitting 
that in 2020, Pope Francis approved his nomination by Archbishop 
Blairs for the honorary title of monsignor.
  Over the course of his ministry, Monsignor Tucker did so much more 
than preside over Masses at the churches he led. He visited the sick at 
Charlotte Hungerford Hospital where he was chaplain, fortifying the 
spiritual centers of patients and their loved ones. He spent many 
summers working at Camp Workcoeman, one of the oldest continuously 
operated Scout camps in the country. And his weekly column in the 
Register Citizen, strengthened his deep connections to the community as 
well as parishioners and friends. Though he stepped down from his 
leadership role at St Louis de Montfort Parish in 2022, today, he 
continues his ministry by serving as chaplain for the cloistered order 
of nuns at the Abbey of Regina Laudis.
  As a religious leader, advocate, mentor and friend, Monsignor Tucker 
has touched the lives of thousands. Through all of his good work he has 
instilled hope and promise in all of those who have had the good 
fortune to work with him. His spiritual guidance has nourished the 
souls of many and his compassion has encouraged others to give more of 
themselves. He has embodied some of the many mottos he has lived by 
including ``Success is in the effort, not the outcome and ``Joy, pass 
it along.
  Today, as he celebrates his 55th year as a priest, he continues to 
make a difference in the lives of others--his work a reflection of the 
heart of Catholic teachings. I am proud to extend my deepest thanks and 
appreciation as well as my heart-felt congratulations to Monsignor 
Robert Tucker as he celebrates this very special milestone. Happy 55th 
Anniversary and best wishes for many more years of success.
I rise today to pay tribute 
to the life of Reverend Miriam Mercado and her service to our 
community. Reverend Mercado peacefully passed away in her home on 
Easter Day, April 20, 2025, at the age of 101.
  On July 23, 1923, Miriam Mercado was born in Puerto Rico. When she 
was nine years old, her family moved to New York, and in 1968, she 
moved her family to California where she ultimately resided in the 
Inland Empire.
  For the past 30 years, Reverend Mercado lived in the City of 
Claremont where she served as a Staff Minister to the Claremont Church 
of Religious Science. Additionally, she not only ran a successful 
business as a Tax Accountant, but she also spent 18 years volunteering 
as a Chaplain at the Pomona Valley Hospital.
a true businesswoman who always kept her roots in 
mind. She made efforts to start a business that served Puerto Rican 
rice dishes after discovering the lack of Puerto Rican restaurants in 
her neighborhood.
  In her adult life, her family and community looked up to her as the 
matriarch of her family. As a single mother, she had six children and 
later went on to have two grandchildren and several great-
grandchildren. When she had the opportunity to further her education, 
Rev. Mercado attended San Antonio College in unison with her oldest 
grandchild.
  Even when met with unexpected challenges, she persisted. At the age 
of 56, a stroke left her aphasic and with communication difficulties, 
forcing her to retire. At 96, she was met with another stroke coupled 
with isolation from the COVID-19 pandemic. Still, Miriam ensured close 
communication with her family and others in the community, 
demonstrating that unexpected challenges would not strain her 
relationships with those she loved.
  In her late 70s, she helped found the Agape International Spiritual 
Center in Los Angeles. Inspired by her upbringing as a spiritualist due 
to the influence of her Jamaican grandmother, she remained very 
involved with the Center for Spiritual Living throughout the rest of 
her life.
  For her outstanding accomplishments and remarkable life, it is my 
honor to recognize Reverend Miriam Mercado. Her service and commitment 
to the Inland Empire and beyond are worthy of the highest commendation.
I rise today to honor the 
remarkable life of Johnnie Mae Streater, a woman who graced this world 
for 81 years. While her passing marks the end of an era, her legacy of 
selfless service to others and her unwavering faith will continue to 
live on through the family she leaves behind, her beloved daughter, 
Tamond, five grandchildren, and six great-grandchildren.
  Born on October 28, 1942, in Leesburg, Florida, Johnnie Mae was the 
daughter of Annie Lee Davis, a homemaker, and Samuel Streater, a 
steelworker. She grew up with a strong foundation of love, faith, and 
hard work that would guide her throughout her life.
  ``Momma-Streater, as she was known by her family, graduated from 
Fifth Avenue High School in Pittsburg, Pennsylvania, in 1962. Soon 
after, she relocated to Illinois, where she began her dedicated career 
as a Caseworker with the Illinois Department of Public Aid. For 30 
years, she served the community with compassion and integrity, touching 
countless lives before retiring with grace.
  In the 1970s, Johnnie Mae embraced the Lord Jesus Christ into her 
life, a decision that would profoundly shape the rest of her life. She 
Joined Chicago Miracle Temple, formerly known as the Regal Theatre, 
founded by the

esteemed R.W. Schambach on the Southside of Chicago. There, she not 
only became a devout Christian but also an ordained Evangelist, 
embodying the strength and devotion of her faith. Despite never 
obtaining a drivers license, Johnnie Mae remained a steadfast, 
lifelong rider of the Chicago Transit Authority, traveling daily by bus 
for her work and church duties. Her determination and resilience were 
reflected in every aspect of her life.
  Johnnie Mae was revered by all who knew her. In the neighborhood, 
when she walked down the street, there was an unspoken respect. 
Neighbors would remove their hats, hide their beer cans, and straighten 
up their behavior, for they knew that ``Momma Streater was a woman of 
integrity, a true representative of Gods love. Her presence commanded 
respect, and no one wanted to disappoint her with anything less than 
their best. Johnnie Mae was the rock of her family, the heart of her 
community, and a source of unwavering love and strength. Her absence 
will be deeply felt by all who had the privilege of knowing her. Mr. 
Speaker, I ask that my colleagues join me in honoring the life of Ms. 
Johnnie Mae Streater.
IN MEMORY OF THE HONORABLE CURTIS PARHAM ``CP REDDING, SR.
I rise today to honor the life and legacy of 
a loving husband, dedicated grandfather, doting grandfather, astute 
entrepreneur, committed public servant and dear friend of longstanding, 
the Honorable Curtis Parham ``CP Redding. Sadly, ``CP passed away 
on May 9, 2025. A service to commemorate his remarkable life was held 
on May 15, 2025, in Eufaula, Alabama.
  Born on September 8, 1932, in Hatcher Station, Quitman County, 
Georgia, ``CP was the son of Curtis Lowe Redding and Ora Inez (Green) 
Redding. He was a man of unwavering character, known for his commanding 
presence, generous spirit, and fierce devotion to his family and 
friends. His kindness, strength, and integrity inspired everyone who 
had the privilege of knowing him.
  A passionate outdoorsman, ``CP enjoyed hunting, traveling cross-
country with his beloved wife Annie Ruth, and creating lasting memories 
through his woodworking. He was a true entrepreneur, operating a 
successful logging company for over 25 years while also owning and 
managing a country store, bait shop, grocery store, and restaurant. His 
diverse ventures showcased his dedication to serving the community.
  It has been said that ``Service is the rent that we pay for the space 
that we occupy here on this earth. ``CP paid his rent and he paid 
it well. His commitment to improving lives in the Chattahoochee Valley/
Quitman County was evident through his service on more than 13 boards 
and commissions, often as Chairman. He tirelessly advocated for better 
education, healthcare, and public services, leaving a lasting impact on 
countless lives.
  On a personal note, ``CP was my friend and supporter for many 
years. He always advocated for all things Quitman County. He never told 
me what I wanted to hear, he always told me what he felt I needed to 
hear. I will be forever grateful for the timbre of his character and 
the fidelity of his friendship.
  ``CP accomplished much in life but none of it would have been 
possible without the love and support of his beloved wife of nearly 74 
years, Annie Ruth Redding; his children, Vickie Turner (David Gatch) of 
Prattville, Alabama, Curtis Parham ``Bubba Redding (Dawn) of 
Cuthbert, Georgia, and John Melton Redding (Amanda) of Baton Rouge, 
Louisiana; and his sister, Gail Redding Corlee (Leonard) of Georgetown, 
Georgia. ``CP also leaves behind seven grandchildren, nine great-
grandchildren, two great-great-grandchildren, and numerous nieces, 
nephews, and cousins.
, my wife Vivian and I, along with the more than 765,00 
people of Georgias Second Congressional District, salute and honor 
life of Honorable Curtis Parham ``CP Redding, Sr., a man of purpose 
and heart, whose enduring love for his family and community will never 
be forgotten. I ask my colleagues in the House of Representatives to 
join us in extending our deepest condolences to his family and all 
those who mourn his loss during this difficult time of bereavement. I 
pray that they will be consoled and comforted by an abiding faith and 
the Holy Spirit in the days, weeks, and months ahead.
I missed Roll Call Votes No. 123 through 
Roll Call No. 124. Had I been present, I would have voted YEA on Roll 
Call No. 123, and YEA on Roll Call No. 124.
I rise today to recognize the South 
Fairfax Chamber of Commerce and the honorees of the 2025 Achievement 
Honors Gala. Each year, the Chamber brings together community and 
business leaders and extraordinary individuals who exemplify service, 
innovation, and dedication to our community.
  This years Member to Watch Award recipient is Dr. Swathi M. Reddy of 
All Smiles Orthodontics. A native of India and a lifelong learner, Dr. 
Reddy has pursued excellence in her field across three countries. She 
earned her dental degree in India, her DMD from Boston University where 
she graduated with high honors and was inducted into the Omicron Kappa 
Upsilon honor fraternity, and her specialization in Orthodontics from 
the University of Nevada, Las Vegas. As a local practitioner and 
community leader, Dr. Reddy has donated 3D printers to elementary 
schools and actively supports numerous professional organizations. She 
is a great example of how professional excellence can be paired with 
deep community investment.
  The Community Impact Award honors two remarkable individuals: Elena 
Jordon and Ron Kowalski, both of whom have made lasting contributions 
to South Fairfax.
  For more than a decade, Elena Jordon has volunteered with the South 
County Athletic Booster Club, raising over $40,000 annually and helping 
organize major community events such as the Lorton Holiday Extravaganza 
and the Spring Fling. As co-founder of The Emma Jordon Kidz Fighting 
Cancer Foundation named in honor of her daughter, Elena has raised over 
$140,000 in support of pediatric oncology research and families at 
Walter Reed National Military Medical Center. Her legacy of service is 
driven not only by experience, as a veteran of the Army Nurse Corps, 
but also by her compassion.
  Ron Kowalski, founding member of the Chamber and leader of the Ron K 
Real Estate Group, has also played a pivotal role in the community. For 
the past ten years, he has served on the Board of the Lorton Community 
Action Center and organized the popular Monopoly Tournament fundraiser, 
now in its 16th year. His dedication to civic life exemplifies the 
spirit of leadership that strengthens our community.
  The Chamber also supports the next generation of business leaders 
through its Student Pro-Growth Business Scholarships, which recognize 
outstanding high school seniors who have demonstrated entrepreneurial 
spirit and academic achievement. I am proud to congratulate and include 
in the Record the 2025 scholarship recipients:

       Gavin Flynn, South County High School
       Christine Le, Mount Vernon High School
       Ella Ridgway, Lake Braddock Secondary School
       Zachary Allen, South County High School
       Aidan Barker, West Springfield High School

  These students represent the best of South Fairfaxs future, and 
their achievements give us great hope for the years ahead.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in congratulating the 
2025 honorees and thanking the South Fairfax Chamber of Commerce for 
its ongoing work to support local businesses and recognize community 
champions.
I rise today to recognize the James 
Madison High School Robotics Team, Team 620, known proudly as the 
Warbots.
  The Warbots participate in the FIRST Robotics Competition, an 
international high school robotics competition. This year, Team 620 
qualified for the FIRST Robotics World Championship held in Houston, 
Texas, marking only the fourth time in the teams 25-year history that 
they have achieved this honor.
  At the Championship, the Warbots and their robot, ``Dory, delivered 
a remarkable performance, finishing 11th in the Galileo Divisions 
qualification rounds. The team went on to serve as captain of a three-
team alliance, selecting partners from India, Canada, and Michigan. 
They then went against the 5th seeded alliance and won with a score of 
228-227.
  In addition to their success in Houston, the Warbots had an extremely 
successful regional competition season. In January, FIRST released this 
years challenge, ``Reefscape, prompting teams to design, build, and 
automate their robots in under two months. During District Competitions 
in March and District Championships in early April, Team 620 captured 
the Excellence in Engineering Award and the Autonomous Award. Their 
alliance won the Alexandria event and earned the highest score of the 
year in the FIRST Chesapeake District.
  I include in the Record, the eighteen students who represented James 
Madison High School at the World Championship:

       Josh Lauro; Graduating Senior
       Annabelle Hallworth; Graduating Senior
       Nick Abbott; Graduating Senior
       Daphne Jaillon; Graduating Senior
       Davin Meggers; Graduating Senior
       Noah Weintraub; Graduating Senior
       Zach Sinclair
       Michelle Cerga
       Isaac Gantsoudes
       Theo Tatro
       Thomas Santonicola

       Ishaan Pandya
       Julia Blinde
       Liam McLaughlin
       Zihe Chen
       Zihou Chen
       Riya Datta
       Tristan Moss

  These talented students were supported on their journey by lead 
mentor Jeff Ressin, school sponsor AJ Benker, and a dedicated team of 
mentors and parent volunteers.
, I commend the Warbots for their innovation and teamwork. 
I ask my colleagues to join me in recognizing these students and 
wishing Team 620 continued success in future seasons.
I rise today to honor the life 
of Mrs. Doretta Brown. She was a woman of quiet strength, deep faith, 
and unwavering love for her family, students, and community. Her 
presence brought warmth, wisdom, and a gentle grace that touched the 
lives of all who knew her.
  Born on March 26, 1953, in Tuscaloosa, Alabama, Mrs. Brown was the 
eldest daughter of Tommie and Daisy Royster. She moved through life 
with a deep sense of purpose and compassion, grounded in the values 
instilled in her from a young age. She was baptized in 1966 at Linwood 
Church of Christ, a moment that reflected the faith that would anchor 
her life.
  What truly defined Mrs. Brown was her deep love of family. As a 
devoted wife, mother, and grandmother, her greatest joy was spent with 
her late husband, Mr. Ivory Brown, and their two children, Anthony and 
Duryea Doran. She later became a proud grandmother to Anthony, Jaxon, 
Skylar, and Hudson. She was also a loving aunt to two nephews and four 
nieces, nurturing them with the same kindness and care she gave to 
everyone in her life. Mrs. Brown cherished every moment spent with her 
family--a life filled with love and partnership until her passing.
, New York, where she was admired for her 
dedication and gentle, healing spirit she brought to her work and 
students. Her love of reading reflected her lifelong commitment to 
learning and the power of education. Perhaps one of the most treasured 
memories for those who knew her was hearing her sing the song 
``Grace--a simple yet powerful testament to the faith and love she 
carried within her heart.
a life of compassion, service, and enduring 
faith. Her legacy lives on through the countless lives she touched, the 
family she loved so dearly, and the grace with which she walked through 
the world. Her strength, kindness, and dedication will always be 
remembered, and her legacy will continue to inspire all those whose 
lives she touched.