Title IV of Senate Resolution 4, agreed to by the Senate of February 
4, 1977, calls for establishment of a system for a computerized 
schedule of all meetings and hearings of Senate committees, 
subcommittees, joint committees, and committees of conference. This 
title requires all such committees to notify the Office of the Senate 
Daily Digest--designated by the Rules Committee--of the time, place and 
purpose of the meetings, when scheduled and any cancellations or 
changes in the meetings as they occur.
  As an additional procedure along with the computerization of this 
information, the Office of the Senate Daily Digest will prepare this 
information for printing in the Extensions of Remarks section of the 
Congressional Record on Monday and Wednesday of each week.
  Meetings scheduled for Thursday, December 7, 2023 may be found in the 
Daily Digest of todays Record.

     10 a.m.
       Committee on Appropriations
       Subcommittee on Transportation, Housing and Urban 
           Development, and Related Agencies
         To hold hearings to examine communities in crisis, 
           focusing on what happens when disaster recovery funds 
           are delayed.
                                                            SD-192
       Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions
         Business meeting to consider S. 1840, to amend the Public 
           Health Service Act to reauthorize and improve the 
           National Breast and Cervical Cancer Early Detection 
           Program for fiscal years 2024 through 2028, S. 3392, to 
           reauthorize the Education Sciences Reform Act of 2002, 
           the Educational Technical Assistance Act of 2002, and 
           the National Assessment of Educational Progress 
           Authorization Act, S. 3393, to reauthorize the SUPPORT 
           for Patients and Communities Act, S. 644, to expand the 
           take-home prescribing of methadone through pharmacies, 
           and other pending calendar business.
                                                            SD-430
       Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs
       Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations
         To hold hearings to examine Coast Guard Academy 
           whistleblowers, focusing on stories of sexual assault 
           and harassment.
                                                            SD-562
       Committee on the Judiciary
         To hold hearings to examine cleaning up the C-Suite, 
           focusing on ensuring accountability for corporate 
           criminals.
                                                            SH-216
     2:30 p.m.
       Committee on Energy and Natural Resources
       Subcommittee on Public Lands, Forests, and Mining
         To hold hearings to examine S. 1281, to amend the Omnibus 
           Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993 to provide for 
           security of tenure for use of mining claims for 
           ancillary activities, and S. 1742, to modify the 
           requirements applicable to locatable minerals on public 
           domain land.
                                                            SD-366
       Committee on Foreign Relations
         To receive a closed briefing on Iran and its proxy threat 
           to U.S. policy and personnel post-October 7.
                                                           SVC-217
       Select Committee on Intelligence
         To receive a closed briefing on certain intelligence 
           matters.
                                                            SH-219
     3 p.m.
       Committee on Rules and Administration
         To hold an oversight hearing to examine the Government 
           Publishing Office.
                                                            SR-301
                              DECEMBER 13
     10 a.m.
       Committee on the Judiciary
         To hold hearings to examine pending nominations.
                                                            SD-226
     2:30 p.m.
       Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation
       Subcommittee on Space and Science
         To hold hearings to examine government promotion of 
           safety and innovation in the new space economy.
                                                            SR-253
       Select Committee on Intelligence
         To receive a closed briefing on certain intelligence 
           matters.
                                                            SH-219
     3 p.m.
       Committee on the Judiciary
       Subcommittee on Competition Policy, Antitrust, and Consumer 
           Rights
         To hold hearings to examine the impact of algorithms on 
           competition and consumer rights.
                                                            SD-226
I rise today in recognition of the 
distinguished career of Andy Flick, who spent 14 years in service to 
the United States House of Representatives, before departing recently 
to serve as Legislative Director to the Vice President at the White 
House.
  Andys career in the House pre-dates my own. He started in 2009 in 
former Congressman Ike Skeltons office before serving in senior roles 
with Representatives Costa, Moulton, and Trone. As the Vice Chair for 
Policy of the New Democrat Coalition (New Dems), I feel especially 
fortunate that Andy led the New Dems during the 117th Congress and 
through much of the 118th Congress. Throughout my time working with 
him, I have observed that Andy is an incredibly dedicated, thoughtful, 
and creative staffer and leader.
  Under Andys leadership, the New Dems fully leveraged Democratic 
majorities in the House and Senate, and control of the White House to 
pass historic legislation, including the Inflation Reduction Act to 
lower health care and energy costs and the Chips and Science Act to 
bolster American competitiveness in a globalized world. I am 
particularly indebted to Andy for the role that he and the New Dems 
played in helping me realize the RECOMPETE Act, which passed as a 
provision of the Chips and Science Act. The RECOMPETE Pilot Program 
aims to create renewed economic opportunity in communities that have 
faced persistent economic distress. I grew up in one of these 
communities, and it inspired me to run for Congress. I can leave 
Congress more easily after my current term ends, knowing the RECOMPETE 
Act was brought to life, in large part because of Andy and the New 
Dems tireless work and skill.
  During the 118th Congress, where Democrats have been in the minority, 
Andy embraced the Coalitions unique ability to bridge the partisan 
divide and make progress on the most pressing challenges facing our 
country. This includes the role New Dems played in helping avert a 
fiscal crisis by securing the votes needed to raise the debt ceiling 
and orienting policy task forces around critical legislation. Countless 
New Dems have Andy to thank for seeing their policy priorities move 
forward despite tough odds.
  Throughout his time in working in the legislative branch, Andy left 
his fingerprints on policies that have improved the lives of the 
American people. Even more importantly, he has recruited, mentored, and 
helped develop countless staffers who want to be like him--with serious 
legislative acumen and a steadfast commitment to public service. Andys 
sharp wit, humor, and unique ability to think of and then pass sound 
policy ideas are already sorely missed. On behalf of my office and the 
New Dems, I thank Andy for the legacy he has left on the Hill and for 
all the remarkable public service he has delivered and will continue to 
deliver at the White House.
  We are so proud of him and will be rooting for him, always.
I rise to honor Fran Duvall, who joined 
my office when I first came to Congress. Fran had worked for my 
predecessor Sidney R. Yates, who recommended that I hire Fran because 
of her many talents and her ability to work as a team member.
  Fran was kind, sweet, patient, competent and diligent in setting up 
our operations. She set an early example for my young staff on how to 
be an effective staffer on Capitol Hill. She was integral in my 
seamless transition to the House of Representatives and I, like my 
staff, relied on her guidance. But more importantly, she was 
progressive, welcoming, and inclusive before that was fashionable. Fran 
represented the very best of this lnstitution.
  I send my deepest condolences to her family and gratitude for sharing 
her with Team Schakowsky and the House of Representatives. I include in 
the Record the following obituary, published in the December 5th 
Washington Post, describing her life of achievement.

       The family of Frances Eloise Duvall honors her memory 
     during this holiday season.
1 January 1935 at home in Landover, 
     Maryland and died 14 May 2022 in Fairfax, Virginia. She was 
     the ninth and last child of Anna Louise (nee Bennett) and 
     George Paul Duvall and grew up in the nations capital. After 
     graduating from Immaculate Conception Academy in 1952, Ms. 
     Duvall worked as a typist for the Navy Department, as a 
     secretary with the University of Maryland Engineering 
     Department and later with the Civil Service Commission.
1950s while both 
     were members of the Bladensburg Skate Club. They were married 
     in 1956 and, a year later, moved to Waynesboro, VA. There 
     they had three children, Teresa, Roger, and Mary Helen, who 
     did not survive a premature birth. Ms. Duvall and Mr. Daggy 
     divorced in 1976, at which time Ms. Duvall began working 
     full-time at the University of Virginia while studying at 
     Mary Baldwin College (now University) in Staunton, earning 
     her Bachelor of Arts in Business Management in 1981.
, DC, where she 
     worked as the office manager for Representative Sidney R. 
     Yates, IL, and his successor, Jan Schakowsky, until Ms. 
     Duvalls retirement in 2001.
       The final chapter of Ms. Duvalls life was written at 
     Greenspring Retirement Community in Springfield, VA, where 
     she lived from 2003 until her death. She was deeply involved 
     in various aspects of the community, particularly the 
     Greenspring Players, the theatre troupe at the retirement 
     village. Ms. Duvall served in many capacities: chair, co-
     chair, director, producer, prompter, computer support, 
     publicity, props and cast parties, as well as upgrading and 
     clarifying policies and procedures for the Players. Ms. 
     Duvall also created and maintained a scholarship program, 
     awarding scholarships to undergraduate and graduate students 
     majoring in all aspects of theatre.
       Additionally, Ms. Duvall hosted various shows on the 
     Villages internal television station and assisted in 
     producing the stations programs on presidential libraries. 
     She also created sign language classes at the Village.
a life-long Democrat and vigorously defended 
     equal rights. She volunteered on Election Day to ensure that 
     residents could cast their vote.
       After attending many memorial services to honor friends who 
     had passed, Ms. Duvall decided, in January 2020, to celebrate 
     her 85th birthday with beautiful music performed by her 
     children and grandchildren and amusing, heartfelt anecdotes 
     from her friends and loved ones. Ms. Duvall leaves behind her 
     daughter, Teresa, and granddaughter Zoe, as well as her son, 
     Roger, his wife Kimberlea, and their children, Maximilian and 
     Celia.
I rise today to honor Mrs. Patricia 
OBannon, Tuckahoe District Supervisor and member of the Henrico County 
Board of Supervisors.
1995 to represent the Tuckahoe 
Magisterial District. With her election, she became the first woman to 
be elected to the Henrico Board of Supervisors, where she became a 
strong voice for the communities she serves.
  A graduate of Virginia Commonwealth University, Mrs. OBannon has 
proven to be a source of knowledge for the Henrico community. Her 
expertise is informed by her service on the Richmond Regional 
Transportation Planning Organization, the Greater Richmond Partnership, 
and as the former Chair of the Capital Region Airport Commission.
  Throughout her tenure, she has focused on bettering Henrico Countys 
infrastructure and improving Henrico schools. She has also been an 
advocate for revamping the sidewalk policy to increase public safety 
and accessibility to sidewalks for all in Henrico.
a dedicated public servant on behalf of her 
constituents for the last 27 years, working with colleagues across the 
aisle to find solutions for her community. She has been a steady 
leader--stepping in as Chairwoman for the fifth time in February 2017 
after the passing of Brookland Representative Richard Glover. Her 
unwavering dedication to working on behalf of Tuckahoe and all of 
Henrico County has left a lasting impression for years to come.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in congratulating and 
thanking Mrs. Patricia OBannon for her outstanding service on behalf 
of Henrico County as Tuckahoe Supervisor, and in wishing her the best 
as she retires.
I rise today to honor Mr. Frank J. 
Thornton, Fairfield Supervisor and Chairman of the Henrico County Board 
of Supervisors.
  Since his election to the Henrico County Board of Supervisors in 
1995, Mr. Thornton has worked hard to build bridges and bring the 
Henrico community together. His historic election is a clear example of 
his perseverance and hard work.
  Throughout his career, Mr. Thornton has worked hard to empower all in 
Henrico. In the

classroom, he provided guidance and instruction to students as a 
professor of French literature. As a community leader, he has been a 
driver for change--challenging the status quo time and again. His poise 
in leadership and fearless advocacy have been the hallmarks of his 
career. Mr. Thorntons passion for Henrico County and his dedication to 
the fight for equity and representation have left a permanent mark on 
the community.
  For many years, Mr. Thornton served as the only Democrat and Black 
member on the board. That is no longer the case today, thanks in part 
to Mr. Thorntons tenacity and ability to inspire change. He has become 
a role model for many and has set a great example for up-and-coming 
leaders.
  Throughout his 27-year tenure as Fairfield Supervisor, he has been 
elected as Chairman of the Henrico County Board of Supervisors multiple 
times. Through his work, he has embraced change and highlighted 
Henricos diversity. He has also been a strong advocate for the 
development of community resources--such as the Frank J. Thornton YMCA 
Aquatic Center and the extension of the bus line to Short Pump. Through 
his work, he has helped Henrico become more connected, vibrant, and 
active. A patient and dedicated representative, Mr. Thornton has kept 
his promise of ``Making Henrico Better for the Future.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in congratulating and 
thanking Mr. Frank J. Thornton for his outstanding service on behalf of 
Henrico County as Fairfield Supervisor, and in wishing him the best as 
he retires.
I rise to thank Sergeant Major Collin D. 
Barry for 24 years of dedicated service to our Nation.
  Sergeant Major Barry first answered the call to service in 1999 when 
he enlisted in Tucumcari, New Mexico. Twenty-four years later, he is 
retiring as the Marine Corps Installations National Capital Region-
Marine Corps Base Quantico Command Senior Enlisted Leader.
  Sergeant Major Barry has a distinguished record of service, evident 
by the numerous service awards he has received, including a Purple 
Heart, the Navy and Marine Corps Meritorious Service Medal, and the 
Navy and Marine Corps Achievement Medal.
  Throughout his career, Sergeant Major Barry has selflessly served his 
country, deploying in support of multiple military operations including 
Operation Iraqi Freedom I, Operation Iraqi Freedom II, and Operation 
Inherent Resolve. He has served as an instructor and been a role model 
to students while assigned to the Naval Reserve Officer Training Corps-
University of New Mexico, and as a Basic Reconnaissance Course Platoon 
Sergeant, Chief Instructor, and Course Chief at the Reconnaissance 
Training Company, Advanced Infantry Training Battalion, School of 
Infantry-West.
  Sergeant Major Barry has also committed himself to learning and has 
been a dedicated student during his time of service. He earned his 
Doctor of Philosophy degree in Global Leadership and Organizational 
Management from the Indiana Institute of Technology, a Master of 
Business Administration degree from Texas A&amp;M University, and a 
Bachelor of Business Administration from the Anderson School of 
Management at the University of New Mexico.
  His expertise and leadership led him to participate in two Commandant 
of the Marine Corps task forces at the Pentagon where he worked to 
improve culture, force preservation, and human performance optimization 
within the force. He has made academic and practitioner advancements in 
military leadership through published research and was recognized by 
the Marine Corps Association for communication distinction for his 
articles published in the Marine Corps Gazette.
  Sergeant Major Barry has gone above and beyond in the many roles he 
has fulfilled throughout his career as a mentor, teacher, student, and 
as a Marine. His legacy of service and leadership will continue through 
all the servicemembers who have had the honor of serving with him.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in celebrating and 
thanking Sergeant Major Collin D. Barry for 24 years of service to our 
country, and in wishing him the best in his retirement.
I was unable to be present to cast my votes 
on December 6, 2023. Had I been present, I would have voted YEA on Roll 
Call No. 698, NAY on Roll Call No. 699, YEA on Roll Call No. 700, NAY 
on Roll Call No. 701, YEA on Roll Call No. 702, NAY on Roll Call No. 
703 and YEA on Roll Call No. 704.
I rise today to recognize Black River 
Technical College on its 50th Anniversary as a two-year degree 
conferring institution serving the First Congressional District of 
Arkansas.
  Since its founding, Black River Technical College has played a major 
role in the professional development of the citizens of Northeast 
Arkansas and Southeast Missouri by offering a wide range of programs, 
such as associate degrees, technical certificates, certificates of 
proficiency, and adult and continuing education courses. Located on two 
campuses in Pocahontas and Paragould, Arkansas, with an enrollment of 
approximately 2,500 students, Black River Technical College has a 
development. BRTCs staff and faculty members are engaged in our 
community and have truly made a difference in the lives of thousands of 
people in my part of the country. The First District is better because 
of their service.
  Congratulations to Black River Technical College. I wish them many 
more years as a successful, integral member of the Northeast Arkansas 
community.
I rise in recognition of Chief 
Master Sergeant Chloe Rainey-Fluellen, United States Air Force, and her 
work as the Department of Defense (DoD) legislative fellow detailed to 
my office for 2023.
  In 2022, Chief Master Sergeant Rainey-Fluellen was selected to 
represent the Air Force as a DoD legislative fellow.
  The DoD legislative fellowship program provides superior 
servicemembers with valuable legislative experience and an 
understanding of how congressional actions affect DoDs budget, roles 
and missions, force structure, military projects, and quality of life.
  Over the past year, Chief Master Sergeant Rainey-Fluellen has been 
essential to my office and the defense portfolio. She has crafted and 
coordinated National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA) amendments in 
line with my priorities and the needs of Northwest Washington 
communities.

  On December 7, 2023, page E1192, in the third column, the 
following appeared: priorities and the needs Northwest Washington 
communities.
  
  The online version has been corrected to read: priorities and 
the needs of Northwest Washington communities.

  Chief Master Sergeant Rainey-Fluellen worked to overhaul financial 
literacy curricula for DoDEA schools across the globe, which was 
introduced and subsequently included in the House-passed version of the 
FY24 NDAA.
  Chief Master Sergeant Rainey-Fluellen shared strategic insight on 
policymaking, the NDAA and appropriation processes to several military 
workshops and courses, educating more than 80 senior enlisted leaders.
  She was instrumental in the success of Veterans Forums in 
Washingtons Second Congressional District, which reached more than 300 
veterans to address issues impacting housing, health care, education 
and employment.
  Chief Master Sergeant Rainey-Fluellen is originally from New Orleans, 
Louisiana. She is happily married to her husband, Demetrius, and 
together they share a one-year-old son, Demetrius ``DJ Jr. She is 
also a bonus mom to three young women, Surryeah, Jasmine and Jada. She 
is the proud granddaughter of Joseph E. Robinson, a Merchant Marine who 
served in Vietnam.

  On December 7, 2023, page E1192, in the third column, the 
following appeared: Joseph E. Robinson, a Merchant Marine who 
saved in Vietnam.
  
  The online version has been corrected to read: Joseph E. 
Robinson, a Merchant Marine who served in Vietnam.

  She has background as a medical technician with experience in family 
health, womens health, immunizations and emergency care. She holds a 
Bachelor of Science in Business Administration, a Master of Science in 
Human Resources Management and a certification in Project Management 
Professional. Additionally, she was selected for both the competitive 
Amy War College National Security Studies graduate certification 
program as well as four congressional fellowships centered on National 
Security, Foreign Affairs, Artificial Intelligence and Public Policy.
  The Air Force recognized her hard work, leadership and dedication and 
promoted her to the rank of Chief Master Sergeant on December 1, 2023.
  I thank Chief Master Sergeant Rainey-Fluellen for her commitment and 
service to her community, Washingtons Second Congressional District 
and the United States of America.
I rise today to honor a remarkable veteran, an 
esteemed member of our community in western Massachusetts, and a 
national hero. Born and raised in Holyoke, Massachusetts, Harry L. 
Chandler is one of the few remaining members of the Greatest 
Generation. Now 102 years old, Harry will be returning to Pearl Harbor 
to commemorate the day that will live in infamy.
  Harrys military service began when he chose to enlist in the United 
States Navy in 1939, right before completing his high school education. 
Enlisting as a hospital corpsman, his service in the Navy during World 
War II showcases his courage and commitment to our country, bravely 
facing the perils of war. His experiences during the attack on Pearl 
Harbor on December 7, 1941, are etched in our nations history. Harrys 
actions that day, rescuing fellow sailors amidst chaos and witnessing 
the tragic fate of the USS Arizona and USS Utah, are a stark reminder 
of the price of freedom and the valor of those who defend it.
  This week, as Harry returns to Pearl Harbor, he is not just 
revisiting a site of historical significance; he is returning as a 
living testament to the bravery of those who served alongside him. 
Accompanied by his granddaughter, Kelli Fahey, and her husband, Ron 
Mahaffee, Harry will partake in numerous commemorative ceremonies, 
including the profound honor of saluting a battleship during the USS 
Arizona memorial service.
, I ask you to join me in recognizing Harry L. Chandler, 
not only as a veteran of World War II, but as a pillar of strength, 
resilience, and humility. His legacy is

an inspiration to us all and will undoubtedly continue to influence our 
community for generations to come.
I am pleased today to honor 
the Capitol Theatre in Rome, NY as it celebrates its 95th Anniversary 
this year.
  The idea for the Capitol Theatre was conceived by brothers Myron J. 
and Joseph S. Kallet. Kallet Theaters, Inc., of Oneida, New York 
partnered with the M.E. Commerford Amusement Company of Scranton, 
Pennsylvania to open the theater on December 10, 1928. It was designed 
by Leon H. Lempert, Jr. and was the first building in the city of Rome, 
New York, to be built as a movie house and the first to offer ``talking 
pictures. The opening program included the feature film Lilac Time, 
starring Colleen Moore and Gary Cooper.
  Until 1974, the Capitol Theatre operated as a first-run movie house, 
and then for the next eleven years was used on occasion for special 
events. The facility was officially re-opened on the 57th anniversary 
of the theater, December 10, 1985, by Capitol Civic Center, Inc., a 
non-profit formed by volunteers.
  In November of 2020, a major restoration project was begun to restore 
the Capital interior to its 1939 period. In July of 2021, the restored 
theater reopened, and in January of 2022 the renovation project was 
completed with a recreation of the markee and blade sign. The theater 
still hosts its 1928 original installation Mo11er theater organ which 
was restored in 2002 and has been used since then to accompany silent 
movies.
  Today, Capitol Theatre auditorium is part of the Capitol Arts Complex 
which is the centerpiece of the ``Rome Arts District. Live stage 
plays, dance shows, classic movies and special events are all hosted at 
the Complex. Also included in the Complex is the two screen Cinema 
Capitol which offers first-run independent movies. The Capitol Arts 
Complex currently hosts over 900 performances annually.
  It is truly an honor, on behalf of New Yorks 22nd Congressional 
District, to congratulate the Capitol Theatre on the occasion of its 
95th Anniversary. I wish them continued success for many years to come.
I rise today to pay tribute to a loyal 
South Carolina State University alumnus, inspirational leader, and 
legendary football coach on his retirement. Coach Oliver ``Buddy 
Pough will retire as head coach of the South Carolina State Bulldogs 
football team at the end of the 2023 season after 22 years.
  Coach Pough first joined the South Carolina State Football Team as an 
undergraduate student in the 1970s. As an offensive lineman, Pough 
helped lead his team to a league crown and back-to-back postseason 
appearances. After graduation, Poughs passion for the sport led him to 
seek a career in coaching. Over three decades, Pough coached at 
numerous South Carolina high schools and the University of South 
Carolina before returning to South Carolina State University as the 
schools 14th head coach in 2002.
  Under Coach Poughs leadership, the team found almost immediate 
success. In 2004, the team tied for the Mid-Easter Athletic Conference 
(MEAC) championship. This was followed by back-to-back outright MEAC 
titles and FCS playoff appearances during the 2008 and 2009 seasons. 
Later, Coach Pough led the team to four additional shared MEAC titles 
and two additional FCS playoff appearances. After almost two decades as 
head coach, Pough secured his first Celebration Bowl Championship in 
2021 and his fifth HBCU National Crown.
  Coach Pough is ranked among the top HBCU and MEAC coaches of all 
time. He has won three MEAC Coach of the Year Awards, two National 
Coach of the Year awards, and two national HBCU titles. In 2019, Coach 
Pough became the winningest head football coach in South Carolina State 
University history. During his retirement, Coach Pough hopes to spend 
more time with his wife of 47 years, Josie, his sons, and his 
grandchildren.
, I ask that you and our colleagues join me in celebrating 
Coach Poughs remarkable career. He is well-regarded by his peers in 
South Carolina and across the Nation and has transformed the lives of 
countless student-athletes on and off the field. Coach Pough will 
remain a pillar of the SC State community and continue to make our 
beloved alma mater shine every day.