CELEBRATING THE INCREDIBLE LIFE OF IRENE ``QUEEN OF ALGIERS BURRUS
I rise today to recognize Ms. 
Irene Burrus, a woman known as a dear friend, mentor and confidant to 
many, and most notably, a cornerstone of the Algiers community, my 
hometown and part of the Congressional District I represent, whose 
influence was felt far and wide. Her commitment to service was evident 
through her extensive involvement in various organizations.
  Irene Burrus, lovingly known as ``Ms. Irene and the ``Queen of 
Algiers, passed away peacefully on August 23, 2024, at the remarkable 
age of 101. Born on March 31, 1923, Irenes life journey began on a 
humble farm in rural Mississippi, where she was raised by her parents, 
Annis and Alonzo Harrison, alongside her four siblings: Ellie, Jack, 
Ruby, and Imogene. The Great Depression deeply influenced her 
upbringing, instilling in her a profound resilience and an unwavering 
sense of community that would define her life. Irenes life was a 
testament to devotion--to her family, her community, and the countless 
causes that she championed with passion and dedication.
  The year she turned 100, she proudly served as the Grand Marshall of 
The Algiers Mardi Gras and rode in the 2024 Krewe of NOMTOC. Irene was 
known for her sharp mind and quick sense of humor, qualities that 
endeared her to all who had the pleasure of knowing her. She often 
remarked, ``Youve got to leave a place better than you found it or 
were really in trouble. I hope Ive helped. Her life embodied this 
philosophy, as she worked tirelessly to uplift her community and 
inspire others to do the same through her active participation and 
generosity.
  As a key figure in the Kiwanis Club, she generously contributed her 
time and resources to numerous other causes. She served as Vice 
President of the Board of Welcome Neighbors and was actively involved 
in the Kiwanis Club, Tall Timbers Garden Club, and the Algiers Charter 
School Association for Fundraising. She was a member of the Algiers 
Police Advisory Group. She not only organized and funded Mardi Gras 
breakfasts for local officers, but also Irenes dedication also 
extended to the Military Wives Organization, the Old Aurora 
Neighborhood Associations Night Out Against Crime, Save Algiers 
Courthouse, Chalmette Refinings Westbank Citizens Advisory Council 
and the Historic New Orleans French Quarter Easter Parade. As a member 
of the Algiers Republican Women, she tirelessly worked to support and 
raise awareness for local initiatives.
  She was a cherished daughter, sister, wife, mother, grandmother, and 
great-grandmother. Irene is survived by her loving daughter, Marilyn 
Mislove, and her son-in-law, Michael. Her legacy continues through her 
grandchildren: John Crowe (wife Kelly), Rebecca Crowe Claunch (husband 
Charles), Alan Mislove (wife Talmadge), and Caroline Mislove, as well 
as her great-grandchildren Ivy, Courtney, Ava, Abby, Sarah, Reeves, 
Evan, and Mira.
  Preceding her in death were her first husband, Arvid Dahl, her second 
husband, John C. Burrus, and her beloved daughter, Marcia Dahl Crowe.
  I am so blessed and grateful to have known this phenomenal woman, a 
real Trailblazer and Leader, my true friend. Ms. Irene will forever be 
remembered for her indomitable spirit, her tireless dedication to her 
community, and her boundless love for her family. Her legacy of 
kindness, leadership, and service will continue to inspire all who were 
fortunate enough to know her. I will certainly miss my dear friend.
I rise today to commemorate National 
Prisoners of War and Missing in Action Recognition Day and honor those 
who were held captive and were returned, as well as those who remain 
missing.
  Established in 1979 by President Jimmy Carter, National POW/MIA 
Recognition Day is held yearly on the third Friday of September. This 
day is marked by ceremonies at the Pentagon and at military 
installations across the Nation. More than 81,000 American service 
personnel are missing from previous conflicts and approximately 38,000 
are believed to be recoverable. I commend the work of the Defense POW/
MIA Accounting Agency in searching for our missing Americans and 
ensuring that no service member is left behind.
  As a senior member of the House Appropriations Committee, I work hard 
each year to ensure that the POW/MIA Accounting Agency has the 
necessary funding to continue their essential work. We have a duty to 
these service members that have endured unspeakable indignities to 
protect and preserve our freedoms. The United States cannot and will 
not abandon the search for those who gave their last full measure of 
devotion in overseas wars.
  I cannot express the depth of my gratitude for every patriot who have 
served our Nation. I will continue to use my role in Congress to bring 
every imprisoned or missing servicemember home. Mr. Speaker, please 
join me and all of our colleagues in the House of Representatives in 
commemorating National POW/MIA Recognition Day.
I rise today to recognize the Women 
Inspiring Women Leaders Chapter of the American Business Womens 
Association (ABWA), based in Fredericksburg, Virginia, and to celebrate 
American Business Womens Day.
  ABWAs Women Inspiring Women Leaders Chapter held its first meeting 
on May 22, 2019. Since then, the organization has provided 
opportunities for local business leaders to network and learn from one 
another. Through their work to recognize the rich contributions of 
women in business, members have brought together businesswomen from 
various fields and highlighted their voices at the local and national 
level.
  I thank the Fredericksburg Women Inspiring Women Leaders Chapter for 
their unwavering commitment to fostering growth and excellence, 
spotlighting the role of local businesswomen in growing Virginias 
economy, and

empowering women in our communities. I am proud to join them and their 
sister chapters across our country in celebrating 75 years of the ABWA.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in congratulating the 
Fredericksburg Women Inspiring Women Leaders Chapter for their 
remarkable achievements and their commitment to empowering women in 
business. Their dedication exemplifies the spirit of progress and 
excellence we celebrate on American Business Womens Day.
on behalf of Arizonas 8th Congressional 
District, I would like to recognize Cathy Schwanke for her work with 
the Anthem, New River, Desert Hills, and Phoenix Republican Club.
  Cathy saw a need to educate Republicans in the northern most areas of 
our Congressional District and was a driving force in creating this 
group. She works tirelessly to keep members engaged in the political 
process, promote civic engagement, and educate citizens on Republican 
principles.
  I am thankful for Cathys leadership and dedication to conservative 
principles. I sincerely appreciate her service to Congressional 
District 8 and the State of Arizona.
on behalf of Arizonas 8th Congressional 
District, I would like to recognize Donna Rhodes, president of the Sun 
City Grand Republican Club.
  Donna has distinguished herself by providing exceptional service to 
the residents of Sun City Grand, Arizona. As president of the club, 
Donna has been an advocate for educating members on the civic 
engagement process and how to interact with elected officials. The 
efforts of Donna and the Sun City Grand Republican Club have been 
pivotal to the success of elected officials and candidates in the 
Phoenix West Valley.
  I am thankful for Donnas leadership and dedication to conservative 
principles. I sincerely appreciate her service to the 8th Congressional 
District and the State of Arizona.
I rise to recognize Judith Pittman, Chief 
Executive Officer of Second Story. Judith has been serving communities 
in Northern Virginia through Second Story since 1995. Since 1972, 
Second Story has worked closely with youth and families across Northern 
Virginia through strategic programs to help them work towards self-
sufficiency as well as break cycles of homelessness, abuse, and 
poverty. As Chief Executive Officer, Judith has used her background of 
almost 30 years in nonprofit management and advocacy to obtain more 
services for at-risk, abused, homeless and runaway youth--including 
opening seven new programs since 2004 targeted to this population. 
Because of Judith, thousands of youths and families have been able to 
write their Second Stories.
  Judith has served on federal panels to develop standards for 
federally funded programs serving runaway, homeless, and street youth. 
She also was a Greater Washington Nonprofit Roundtable Fellow. She has 
presented at numerous National Conferences on topics relevant to youth 
and young adults. Judith serves on the Policy Advisory Committee for 
the National Network for Youth. She is a member of the Successful 
Children and Youth Policy Team of Fairfax County as a former Board 
Member for the Runaway and Homeless Youth Training and Technical 
Assistance Advisory Board.
, I ask that my colleagues join me in honoring Judith 
Pittman for her tremendous efforts as a leader in Northern Virginia 
communities, as she celebrates her retirement after 30 years with 
Second Story.
I rise today, along with my colleague 
Congressman Mike Thompson, to honor and commend Sustainable Solano as 
it celebrates its 25th anniversary. This remarkable milestone is a 
testament to the crucial work Sustainable Solano has accomplished to 
support sustainable food access in Solano County.
  First established as the Benicia Community Gardens in 1999, 
Sustainable Solanos all-volunteer organization has spearheaded efforts 
to bolster local food systems and promote ecologically sustainable 
practices in Solano County. Since its founding, Sustainable Solano has 
installed 68 sustainable gardens and planted over 400 trees, helping 
bring green infrastructure to urban areas in Solano County.
  Sustainable Solanos critical initiatives are combating food 
insecurity in our communities, raise public awareness about the climate 
crisis, and support our local farmers. In addition, Sustainable 
Solanos efforts to promote youth engagement will help encourage 
todays youth to become the environmental advocates and sustainability 
leaders of tomorrow.
  As our planet faces increasingly severe threats from the climate 
crisis, organizations like Sustainable Solano are critical to building 
sustainable, resilient communities. We look forward to seeing the 
essential work Sustainable Solano will continue to accomplish in our 
communities and beyond.
  On behalf of the constituents of Californias Fourth and Eighth 
Congressional District, we would like to congratulate Sustainable 
Solano on its 25th anniversary and extend our sincere gratitude for its 
service to the Solano County community.
I rise today to honor the extraordinary life 
and legacy of a beloved educator and public servant, former Alabama 
State Senator Priscilla Ann Proffitt Dunn, who passed away on September 
17, 2024, at the age of 80.
  Senator Dunn was born on October 8, 1943, to Johnnie A. Proffitt and 
Mary Ella Walker in Margret, Alabama. She attended J.S. Abrams High 
School, where she made a name for herself as the captain of the Cheer 
Leader Squad and the first Ms. Abrams High.
  Upon graduating from J.S. Abrams High School with Honors in the Class 
of 1961, Senator Dunn continued her educational journey at Alabama 
State University, where she received a bachelors degree in education, 
and the University of Montevallo where she earned her masters degree 
in education.
  With a lifelong passion for education, Senator Dunn worked in the 
Public School System of Alabama for 30 years where she poured into the 
children of her community. Known for her kindness and generosity, she 
often personally paid for school supplies that many of her underserved 
students could not afford.
  In 1998, motived by the pursuit of justice and an abiding love for 
the people of her community, Senator Dunn sought public office, 
bringing her immense talents to the Alabama State Legislature where she 
represented the Bessemer and Jefferson County area for nearly a quarter 
century. She began her political career in the Alabama House, where she 
represented the 56th District from 1998 to 2009. She later represented 
District 19 in the Alabama State Senate, serving from 2009 until her 
retirement in 2022. Her 24-year tenure was marked by compassionate and 
powerful advocacy on the issues of education, womens and childrens 
rights, and combating the epidemic of homelessness.
  Senator Dunn spent her life giving back to her community. She served 
in a leadership capacity on numerous organizations, including President 
of the Concerned Citizens of Bessemer Cut-Off, Coordinator for the 
Jefferson County Democratic Conference, Board Member for the Bessemer 
Civic Center, President of the Humanistic Challengers Federated Club, 
Secretary of Girls, Inc. of Central Alabama, Board Member of the 
Jefferson/Shelby Counties American Cancer Society Advisory Board and 
Board Member for the State Democratic Executive Committee and many 
more.
  Having accepted Christ into her life at a young age, Senator Dunn was 
a devoted servant of God who led by example and always practiced what 
she preached. She was an instructor for the Jefferson County Congress 
of Christian Education and a Trustee and Sunday school teacher for her 
home church, the Shady Grove Baptist Church.
  Senator Dunn is survived by her beloved husband, the Honorable Grover 
Dunn; her daughter, the Honorable Karen Dunn Burks (Eric Burks--
deceased), her brother, Herman L. Lumzy; two grandsons, Grover Blake 
Burks and Frederick Brock Burks; nephews, Herman Lumzy (Jasmine), Mario 
Lumzy (Rhonda); her niece, Tameeka Lumzy Todd (Jeremiah) and a host of 
relatives and friends.
  On a personal note, I was blessed to have known Senator Dunn and her 
wonderful family. As Alabamas first Black Congresswoman, I stand on 
the shoulders of amazing leaders like Senator Dunn who opened the doors 
for me and many others. She was a grand dame whose footsteps we as 
Black women elected officials in Alabama are blessed to follow.
  On behalf of Alabamas 7th Congressional District, I ask my 
colleagues to join me in celebrating the extraordinary life and legacy 
of State Senator Priscilla Dunn and her decades of exemplary service to 
the State of Alabama and our Nation.
Mr Speaker, I rise today to recognize the 35th 
anniversary of Fairfax Court Appointed Special Advocates (CASA), a 
nonprofit organization that has provided direct advocacy and support to 
abused and neglected children in Fairfax Countys child welfare system. 
Since its establishment, Fairfax CASA has made an immeasurable impact 
on the lives of these children.
  Fairfax CASA plays a crucial role by vetting, training, and 
supervising community volunteers who are appointed by the Fairfax 
County Juvenile Domestic Relations District Court to represent the best 
interests of children in open abuse and neglect cases. Over the last 35 
years, the organization has trained nearly 1,900 volunteers, serving 
almost 9,000 children since its inception in 1989.
  The vision to bring CASA to Fairfax County began with Judge Jane 
Delbridge, who recognized the need for neutral, dedicated advocates in 
her courtroom. After attending a 1985 conference for judges and 
district attorneys, Judge Delbridge worked alongside Fairfax attorney 
Carole Coile, as well as former Director of Court Services Vince 
Pichcano and other court professionals, to launch the program. Fairfax 
CASA officially opened its doors in 1989, and its first child abuse 
case was assigned to a Court Appointed Special Advocate on January 17 
of that year.
  Since then, Fairfax CASA has continued to grow, both in scope and in 
the number of children it serves. From its first year, when 37 
community members volunteered and 80 children were served, to today, 
where the program assists an average of 350 children annually, Fairfax 
CASA has remained a vital resource for the community. In the most 
recent fiscal year, Fairfax CASA served 395 children from 230 families.
  Over the course of its 35-year history, Fairfax CASA volunteers have 
submitted over 10,000 comprehensive reports to the Court, ensuring that 
judges are equipped with the information necessary to make decisions in 
the best interests of the children. These reports are an essential 
component of the advocacy process, shining a light on the circumstances 
that might otherwise go unheard in the judicial system.
  Fairfax CASAs success is not just measured in the number of cases 
handled but in the lasting difference it has made in the lives of 
thousands of children. The programs deep commitment to direct 
advocacy, as well as its push for systemic change, has earned it the 
respect and admiration of the entire child welfare community.
  As Fairfax CASA celebrates 35 years of service, we are reminded of 
the immense value of its mission. Until the day comes when no child in 
Fairfax County needs the services of a Court Appointed Special 
Advocate, Fairfax CASA will continue to stand as a pillar of hope and 
protection for the children who need it most.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in honoring Fairfax CASA 
for 35 years of outstanding service and advocacy, and for its 
unwavering dedication to the safety and well-being of the most 
vulnerable members of our community.
I rise today to recognize Detective Dale 
Ingram of Van Alstyne, Texas. Detective Ingram has dedicated himself to 
faithfully serving and protecting our community.
  Since 1978, Detective Ingram has served as a law enforcement officer 
in North Texas. Throughout his 45 years in uniform, he has worked as a 
patrol officer, warrant officer, detective, and as a member of the 
North Texas Child Abuse Task Force. Currently, Detective Ingram works 
for the Van Alstyne Police Department. In his career, he has diligently 
fought to protect our children from harm and ensure our communities are 
safe. In May, Detective Ingram was tragically diagnosed with a late 
stage brain tumor, which has affected his quality of life. Despite this 
diagnosis, he has tirelessly fought to spend as much time with his 
family as possible.
  When Detective Ingrams children went through his old files and 
keepsakes, they found that he had received countless exemplary reviews 
from superiors and commendations for his selfless service as a law 
enforcement officer. Some werent written down, as they involved his 
actions in protecting the lives of children who did not have a voice. 
For decades, he has served North Texas with great pride and honor, 
unafraid of those who wish to do harm. Outside of the uniform, 
Detective Ingram is a loving husband, father, and grandfather to 
thirteen grandchildren. I am confident that he will fully triumph in 
the battle against cancer, and I wish him a complete recovery so that 
he may spend many more years with his family.
  I have requested the United States flag to be flown over out Nations 
Capitol in recognition of Detective Ingrams extensive public service 
and dedication to the people of North Texas. May God Bless him.
I rise today to honor a tremendous 
community in my district, The Woodlands, Texas, as it celebrates its 
50th Anniversary on October 19th.
  In the late 1960s and early 1970s, George Mitchell began developing 
plans for a new hometown called The Woodlands. Mr. Mitchells vision 
was for an all-encompassing, integrated community where residents could 
live, work, play, learn and pray among a natural forested and preserved 
environment.
  Beginning with the modest purchase in 1964 of 2,800 acres from the 
Grogan Cochran Lumber Company, over the next decade Mr. Mitchell would 
invest in an additional 17,455 acres as a start to the master planned 
community. The first public school opened in 1971, and The Woodlands 
celebrated its grand opening with the opening of the Village of 
Grogans Mill on October 19, 1974.
  A master planned community far ahead of its time, Mr. Mitchell 
created in The Woodlands a thoughtful and diverse living experience 
that balanced the spirit of neighborhood life with business and 
innovation, all nestled within a grounded natural setting.
  Over its five decades, The Woodlands has grown to include nine 
residential villages, The Woodlands Town Center, Hughes Landing and the 
Woodlands Waterway, the communitys nexus of business and 
entertainment. The Woodlands boasts some of the highest ranked schools 
in the greater Houston region, award-winning medical and wellness 
centers, and places of worship of virtually every denomination. Today, 
approximately, 2,668 businesses, including the headquarters of major 
corporations, are based in The Woodlands.
  The Woodlands has become an economic juggernaut in the Greater 
Southeast Texas area led by the development of The Woodlands Town 
Center. Spanning 1,000 acres, the urban core features premier office 
and retail space, a plethora of world class dining and entertainment 
options, hotels, healthcare and residences, all within a walkable 
environment. Economic development has been key to the success of The 
Woodlands generating commercial growth that has contributed to 
sustaining a low tax rate for residents while preserving the 
exceptional amenities that distinguish The Woodlands from many urban 
cores.
  Likewise, the 151 parks, over 220 miles of hiking and bike trails, 
pools, public art, water sport destinations and signature golf courses 
highlight the communitys natural surroundings. And yet, with all the 
community offers, the forest remains. Over the years, nearly one 
million seedlings have been given away at Arbor Day festivals and 
planted to enrich the communitys forested beauty. Today, almost 8,000 
of 28,500 total acres, remains open space.
  This dedication to the natural environment was a priority in the 
development of The Woodlands. Parks have been planned and developed 
hand-in-hand with residential development. Families can enjoy a park 
within a 10-minute walk. In fact, The Woodlands was designed to be park 
plentiful, boasting one park per 815 residents, placing the community 
200 percent above the national average for parks per resident, 
according to the National Recreation and Parks Association.
  George Mitchell strategically planned The Woodlands with a focus on 
residential development first, laying the groundwork and support for a 
robust commercial destination aimed to create a central hub that would 
enhance the overall community experience and attract businesses, 
residents and visitors. Since its founding, The Woodlands has emerged 
from a fledging outpost of the Greater Houston area to a thriving 
community ranked the No. 1 Community to Live in America in 2021 and 
2022. As The Woodlands celebrates five decades of diversity, innovation 
and community pride, we all look forward to its even more promising 
future.
  In recognition of the 50th Anniversary, The Woodlands community will 
come together for a week of events culminating in a community wide 
celebration on October 19th. I congratulate The Woodlands on its 50th 
Anniversary and wish its residents a safe and joyous celebration on 
this momentous occasion.
I rise today to recognize former mayor of 
Shelbyville, Tom DeBaun.
  First elected in 2011, Tom served his community as mayor for three 
terms.
  As mayor, he prioritized economic development and residents, 
establishing an adult high school, creating Advantage Shelby County, 
and investing in trails and sidewalks to increase accessibility.
  Before serving as mayor, Tom was a probation officer and head of the 
citys building and planning commission.
  Today, I thank Tom for his service and support for the Hoosiers of 
Shelbyville.
it is with a heavy heart that I rise to mark 
the passing of a dear friend. On May 14, Michael Steinbarger of 
Edinburgh, Indiana sadly left this world.
  Michael was a native of my hometown of Columbus, Indiana and married 
his wife, Anngie, in 1982. From that point on, they shared their lives 
together on a farm in Edinburgh, where they raised two daughters, 
Hayley Clark and Michelle Tobias.
  Michael was an active servant of his community, proudly serving with 
the Shelby County Farm Bureau Board, Shelby County 4-H, Flat Rock 
Volunteer Fire Department, and was a member of the St. George Lutheran 
Church.
  I am especially thankful for Michael and Anngies wise counsel and 
service as it relates to my Sixth District Agriculture Advisory Board.
  My heart goes out to Anngie, their two children, and their families.
  All who knew Michael were better for having known him, and he will be 
greatly missed.
I rise today in remembrance of Ms. Tracey 
Anne Kennedy, who passed on September 16, 2024, and whose lifes work 
instilled faith, hope, and love in everyone around her.
6, 1963, to John and Carol Kennedy of 
Tonawanda, New York. She attended Sweet Home High School and graduated 
from Buffalo State University with a Bachelor of Arts Degree in 
Political Science. She married John Plante in 1991, and together they 
raised two beautiful children, Michael and Mary Katherine. Though they 
went their separate ways later in life, Tracey lived out the last five 
years of her life with John, who helped her navigate her medical 
journey.
  After being diagnosed with Stage 4 Breast Cancer and later Adenoid 
Cystic Carcinoma, Ms. Kennedy bravely fought for nine years through 
numerous treatments and procedures, always with a positive attitude and 
remaining strong in her faith. As a member of The Chapel at CrossPoint, 
. She was 
everyones loudest cheerleader, strongest supporter, and best friend. 
She relentlessly encouraged her family and friends to strive for the 
impossible and reach for the stars. She always wanted to make everyone 
feel seen and special, armed with her thousand-watt smile and 
contagious laughter.
  Today, Ms. Kennedy is remembered as a hard-working woman of God, who 
put the needs of others first, had a profound love for her children and 
family, and continuously fought for her health. Please join me in 
honoring Ms. Tracey Anne Kennedy for her lifetime of dedication to 
service and faith.