CELEBRATING GEORGE PERRYS 103RD BIRTHDAY AND HONORING HIS SERVICE TO 
                            of pennsylvania
I am pleased to congratulate George Perry 
on his 103rd birthday and for his longstanding service to his country 
and the York County community.
  You would be hard pressed to find a better representative of York 
County than Mr. George Perry. He has served his country, his community, 
and is still active in the running of his familys business. George 
Perry was born on his familys dairy farm in York, Pennsylvania in 
1922. Since then, Perry has become an icon in the community as the head 
of his familys thriving business, Perrydell Farms. Perrydell Farms 
produces fresh milk and ice cream made, all of which is made on site.
  Not only is Perry a veteran of the dairy industry but also World War 
II. He left college in 1943 to join the Army and fight in the Pacific. 
After the war, Mr. Perry took over Perrydell Farms in 1949 with his 
brother. Together, they helped to establish Perrydell as a local one-
stop-shop for fresh, high-quality milk and ice cream. In his 103 years, 
a great deal of change in agriculture in York 
County. One constant throughout that time has been Perrydell Farms, 
which celebrated its 100th anniversary in 2023.
  Perrydells long and storied history in York County is due in large 
part to the work of George Perry, who over his more than a century of 
life has pursued a mission of providing quality products to his 
community. Perrydell Farms is now run by Mr. Perrys three sons, Tom, 
Greg, and Chip. Despite no longer running the farm, George is regarded 
as the farms patriarch, an invaluable member of the farm and familys 
history in the dairy industry.
  It is with great enthusiasm that I congratulate Mr. Perry on his 
103rd birthday, his service to our country, and his success as a 
business owner. His stewardship of Perrydell Farms has allowed it to 
remain a staple of the community, and I hope for their continued 
success for years to come.
I rise today to congratulate Linda Larson on 
fulfilling her lifelong dream of completing her college education. 
Linda graduated with an Associates Degree with an emphasis on 
political science from Inver Hills Community College. She also 
graduated as part of Phi Beta Kappa.
  Linda grew up on a small farm near Ruthton, Minnesota. As the 
daughter of a tenant farmer, Linda learned early on the challenges and 
instability farmers face in trying to earn a living. This informed her 
work at the Minnesota Farmers Union (MFU), where she has advocated for 
affordable healthcare and the needs of family farmers. Additionally, 
Linda has been a strong leader for women in farming. In 2013, she 
helped reestablish the MFU Womens Conference and later received the 
2013 MFU Leadership Excellence award along with her husband, Brian. She 
is the current president of the Dakota County Farmers Union and 
regularly attends Farmers Union events at the local, state and national 
level.
  I know Linda through her work on my Farmers Advisory Council, which 
she has been a member of since I came to Congress in 2019. Linda has 
provided invaluable feedback to my work on agriculture policy as Ive 
fought to ensure family farmers have a strong farm safety net. I look 
forward to our continued collaboration to pass a bipartisan farm bill.
  I congratulate Linda on her graduation and thank her for her service 
to our community.
today, the 12th Congressional District honors 
an exceptional leader within our community: Principal Markisha Stovall 
of Madison Carver Academy. Her unwavering dedication to her students, 
their families, and our community embodies the very essence of 
exemplary public service.
  Born and raised in Detroit, Principal Stovalls resilient life story 
includes overcoming the loss of her mother to addiction, her fathers 
incarceration, and being raised by her grandmother with five siblings. 
Despite these hardships, she graduated from Michigan State University 
and, as a single mother, became an educator to uplift all children.
  Serving as the Principal of Madison Carver Academy, her leadership 
has yielded transformative results: a significant 33 percent surge in 
enrollment, an impressive 99 percent average attendance rate, the 
establishment of over 20 enriching student clubs, and the 
implementation of crucial wraparound services to support families 
facing crises.
  The 12th Congressional District honors her leadership and commitment 
to our students and community. I congratulate her on all her 
accomplishments.
I rise today to recognize a great American 
hero, Private James ``Stanley Mitchell, who volunteered to serve our 
great Nation in World War II and died 82 years ago in a Japanese POW 
camp in Luzon, Philippines. Private Mitchells remains were located and 
identified and have been returned to his family, a testament of his 
courage and sacrifice.
  Private Mitchell was born in Joplin, Missouri on October 2, 1917. The 
family would move frequently during his early life, eventually settling 
down in Hamilton City, California.
  On March 4, 1941, Private Mitchell enlisted in the United States Army 
and was deployed as part of the 31st Infantry Regiment on assignment to 
Clark Field in Luzon, Philippines. Ten months after his initial 
deployment to the Philippines, Imperial Japanese Forces would bomb 
Pearl Harbor, bringing the United States and all her territories into 
World War II. Japanese forces begin a full-scale invasion of Luzon, 
Philippines on December 22, 1941. The 31st Infantry Regiment stood 
defiant and courageous against overwhelming Japanese forces until their 
surrender on April 9, 1942.
  Private Mitchell joined approximately 72,000 American and Filipino 
prisoners of war (POW) on a 65-mile march known as the Bataan Death 
March. These brave souls endured torture, starvation, disease and 
ultimately death at the hands of the Japanese forces. By the end of the 
march, only approximately 52,000 American and Filipino POWs remained 
live.
  Private Mitchell and many surviving POWs would be held at the 
Cabanatuan POW Camp. Conditions would not improve for these courageous 
men. On January 7, 1943, Private Mitchell succumbed to starvation and 
disease, dying at a weight of only 70 pounds. Private Mitchell was 
buried in one of the many mass graves at the camp.
  The Cabanatuan POW Camp would be liberated on January 30, 1945, with 
only 489 POWs remaining alive. Unfortunately, 2,656 brave American POWs 
had lost their lives at the camp.
  Private Mitchell was the first World War II casualty from Hamilton 
City. His status as a POW brought great sadness and pain to his family. 
The news of his death brought devastation to his parents and family. 
His remains were exhumed and identified in September of 2024. Private 
Mitchells remains were brought home to the United States on May 3, 
2025, and he will be laid to rest between his parents at the Los 
Molinos Cemetery, in Northern California.
  Private Mitchells story and sacrifice will not be forgotten. His 
legacy and impact to our community will continue to be felt. His return 
will bring closure to his family. God bless Private Mitchell and 
welcome home.
I rise today to honor the 
remarkable life of Elon Louise Williams, a woman whose dedication to 
her family and community left an enduring legacy.
14, 1930, to Melvina and Hayden Owens. 
She had one brother, Yeoman Owens, who preceded her in death. She lived 
in Harvey, Illinois and was from Milton, Florida.
a woman of strength and devotion. She shared over 
60 years of life and love with her beloved husband, the late Sylvester 
E. Williams, whom she married on January 6, 1950.
  Together, they raised four children: Alan Williams, Dale Williams, 
Vera Williams and Janet Williams, all who attended college. Their 
family was built on love and mutual respect.
  For over three decades, Mrs. Williams faithfully served her community 
as a mail sorter for the United States Postal Service. She often worked 
long hours diligently ensuring our local postal operations ran 
smoothly. She was more than a mail sorter, however. With her consistent 
presence and friendly nature, she was a source of connection for those 
in her community. Her commitment to her work and the genuine care she 
had for her community earned her numerous commendations from both her 
colleagues and her community.
She was known for her generosity, always ready to offer a helping hand 
or a word of encouragement. She made a difference in countless lives, 
often in deeply meaningful ways.
  Beyond her career, Mrs. Williams was the cornerstone of her family. 
She provided unwavering love, support and guidance, shaping the lives 
of her children, grandchildren, and great-grandchildren. Her wisdom and 
kindness created a lasting impact that will be felt for generations.
  While we mourn her passing, we take solace in knowing her legacy will 
extend far beyond her years on earth. Her kind spirit will live on in 
the lives of those she touched, and we will not soon forget her 
incredible deeds and generosity. I thank Mrs. Elon Louise Williams, for 
her years of unwavering service. May she rest in peace.
, I ask that my colleagues join me in honoring the life of
last week, Vice President 
J.D. Vance with his Indian-American wife Usha, achieved a global 
recalibration for energy independence meeting with Americas 
appreciated ally Prime Minister Narendra Modi.
  It is an extraordinary recognition of the positive impact of Indian-
Americans that the Second Lady of America is an Indian-American 
herself.
  American partnership has never been more important with the worlds 
oldest democracy allied with the worlds largest democracy.
  An excellent analysis of this energy achievement was provided in the 
daily Threat Status newsletter from The Washington Times on April 28, 
2025, by Vijay Jayaraj of the CO2 Coalition in Fairfax, Virginia:

       In a landmark move that may well redefine the future of 
     U.S.-India trade relations and global energy geopolitics, 
     Vice President J.D. Vance announced a new trade deal with 
     India. The day after he met with Indian Prime Minister 
     Narendra Modi on April 21, Mr. Vance said the two countries 
     had ``officially finalized the terms of reference for the 
     trade negotiation.
       The deal, initiated against the backdrop of President 
     Trumps tariff threats, could be a masterstroke of economic 
     diplomacy. Mr. Trumps announcement of a 90-day pause on 
     reciprocal tariffs, which could have raised duties on Indian 
     exports, gave India a window to negotiate.
       The energy economics of this deal and its potential to 
     reshape the global market for fossil fuels are fascinating. 
     In his announcement, Mr. Vance declared, ``We want to sell 
     more energy to India and also help it explore its resources, 
     including offshore natural gas reserves and critical mineral 
     supplies.
       The arrangement could propel India toward its long-standing 
     goal of energy surplus. This feat appeared daunting, perhaps 
     impossible, against the nations projections for a massive 
     increase in demand, the fastest-growing among major economies 
     for the next two decades.
       Lets get it straight: India has a long way to go before it 
     even contemplates reducing its consumption of hydrocarbons. 
     Even a middle-class Indian like me residing in a major city 
     experiences power blackouts regularly, which is precisely why 
     the nation has postponed net-zero ambitions to a distant 
     2070. Even the documents for the countrys participation in 
     the nutty United Nations Paris Agreement prioritize domestic 
     energy security over international climate diplomacy.
       Indias reliance on imported energy, which includes more 
     than 85% of its crude oil and roughly 50% of its natural gas, 
     poses a strategic vulnerability. The government aims to more 
     than double natural gas share of the energy mix to 15% by 
     2030. U.S. liquefied natural gas suppliers have surpassed the 
     United Arab Emirates to become Indias second-largest LNG 
     supplier, trailing only Qatar.
       A key player in this unfolding saga is GAIL Ltd., Indias 
     state-owned natural gas company. On April 11, GAIL issued a 
     tender to procure 1 million metric tons per annum of LNG from 
     an existing or new U.S. LNG liquefaction project, with 
     operations commencing by 2030. The agreement, potentially 
     extendable by five to 10 years, signals Indias commitment to 
     U.S. supplies.
       GAIL had to stall a similar process in 2023 to buy a stake 
     in a U.S. LNG plant after President Biden banned export 
     permits for LNG projects. The ban was lifted only after the 
     Trump administration returned to the White House.
       The timing of the upcoming deal is notable, strengthening 
     Indias position as a counterweight to China. The Quad 
     alliance--comprising the U.S., India, Japan and Australia--
     gains heft as India bolsters its energy security and economic 
     clout.
       As Mr. Vance emphasized, the U.S. willingness to share 
     technology and expertise could enhance Indian autonomy, 
     reducing reliance on adversarial suppliers. This alignment is 
     particularly crucial as China intensifies its trade outreach 
     in Southeast Asia and seeks to blunt the effect of U.S. 
     tariffs.
       The Western media will decry the expansion of fossil fuel 
     trading as a climate catastrophe, as though that would 
     resonate with a serious person. The U.S.-India deal wisely 
     eschews climate moralizing and embraces a symbiotic truth: 
     Americas shale boom and Indias hunger for energy perfectly 
     match.
       This deal reaffirms energy sovereignty. Perhaps it marks 
     the beginning of a global recalibration, in which nations 
     rediscover the courage to assert their right to energy 
     abundance and economic self-determination without apologizing 
     to the corrupt and decrepit climate cartel of Brussels, Davos 
     and U.N. corridors.
       May the new world order feature developing nations standing 
     for their futures and rejecting the false campaign of 
     planetary salvation.
when attempting to cast my vote on April 29, 
2025 for S. 146--the TAKE IT DOWN Act, my voting card did not properly 
record my vote. Had my voting card been functioning properly, I would 
have voted YEA on Roll Call No. 104.
I rise today to ask my colleagues to 
join me in congratulating several remarkable Girl Scouts from 
Wisconsins 5th Congressional District for demonstrating leadership, 
creativity, and a commitment to making a lasting impact by earning the 
most prestigious award in Girl Scouting, the Gold Award.
  Gold Award Girl Scouts help their communities and the world by 
identifying a community need, investigating it, devising a plan, and 
leading a team of experts and community members to implement a project 
that produces lasting change. Over the course of 1 to 2 years, Gold 
Award Girl Scouts demonstrate significant initiative, commitment, and 
leadership, distinguishing them from their peers. Through their 
resourcefulness and perseverance, they embody the Girl Scout Law to 
make the world a better place.
, I offer my congratulations to the following outstanding 
young women:

       Ayla Abraham, Troop 6249
       Sophia Ayer, Troop 8017
       Angela Brandes, Troop 4796
       Mia Bremner, Individually Registered Member
       Madeline Bruss, Troop 8329
       Abigail Connett, Troop 4801
       Anissa Griffith, Troop 4633
       Alexandra Higbee, Troop 4569
       Jenna Jegl, Troop 6239
       Rayna Jellish, Troop 9300
       Katelyn Kosfeld, Troop 8093
       Gracie Lochowicz, Troop 4801
       Tatiana Mamalakis, Troop 8004
       Sarah Marcheske, Troop 8329
       Lauren Munson, Troop 4796
       Zoe Peterson, Troop 8017
       Kylie Rich, Troop 4801
       Megan Schatz, Troop 4679
       Skylar Smith, Troop 4333
       Samantha Sroka, Troop 8093
       Sydney Vande Hei, Troop 4582
       Sydney Zarske, Troop 8004
       Eleanor Zgonc, Troop 8004
, I commend these Girl Scouts on their incredible 
accomplishment, and thank them for all the work they have done in 
service of communities across Wisconsins 5th Congressional District.
I rise today to ask my colleagues to join me 
in congratulating Krysta Fowler. Krysta is an individually registered 
member of Girl Scouts of Gulf Coast Florida and has exemplified 
extraordinary leadership, innovative problem-solving, and a 
demonstrated commitment to making a lasting, positive impact, by 
earning the most prestigious award in Girl Scouting, the Gold Award.
  Gold Award Girl Scouts are recognized as trailblazers who are willing 
to tackle the most pressing challenges facing their communities and the 
world with measurable, sustainable, and far-reaching results. To earn 
the Girl Scout Gold Award, high school-age Girl Scouts must identify 
and investigate an issue they care about, devise a plan, and then lead 
a team of experts and community members to implement a project that 
produces lasting change. Over the course of 1-2 years, Gold Award Girl 
Scouts demonstrate significant initiative, commitment, and leadership, 
distinguishing them from their peers. Through their resourcefulness and 
perseverance, they embody the Girl Scout Law to truly make the world a 
better place.
  Krystas project, ``BAT-vocate: Appreciation and Awareness for 
Bats, in partnership with The City of North Port, North Port School 
District, The Environmental Conservancy of North Port, Peace River 
Wildlife Center, Girl Scouts of Gulf Coast Florida, was an excellent 
endeavor to address the issue of bat endangerment, conservancy, and 
awareness in our community. Krysta took action by constructing 26 
sustainable bat habitats across Bradenton, North Port, and Ft. Myers to 
support endangered bat populations. She led educational workshops for 
Girl Scouts and community members on bat conservation and successfully 
petitioned the City of North Port to establish a Bat Awareness Day. 
Additionally, she collaborated with the council to develop a Girl Scout 
badge curriculum, ensuring ongoing education on bat conservation. Her 
efforts will have a lasting positive impact on the community. It is an 
honor to represent brave individuals like Tigran Gambaryan in Congress, 
and I celebrate his return home to his wife Yuki and their two young 
children. God bless their family.
  On behalf of the 17th Congressional District of Florida, 
congratulations to Krysta Fowler for achieving the highest distinction 
in Girl Scouts, the Gold Award. We thank Krysta for her leadership and 
making such a positive, lasting change in our community.
I rise to recognize the 2025 recipients of 
the IES Sales Excellence Awards presented by the institute for 
Excellence in Sales &amp; Business Development.
  IES was created to foster excellence in business sales and 
development practices and to help sales professionals and organizations 
maximize their efforts. Each year, IES recognizes individuals, teams, 
and organizations who demonstrate exemplary performance through 
leadership, risk taking, innovation, vision, and customer development.
  I am proud to include in the Record the following awardees:

       Anthony Robbins is receiving the 15th Institute for 
     Excellence in Sales Lifetime Achievement Award. Anthony was 
     the Senior Vice President, Federal Sales for NVIDIA. He has 
     been responsible for supporting federal customers and their 
     missions, providing the technology and expertise needed to 
     transform and improve their operations.
       The Honorable Beth McGrath is Deloittes Global Leader for 
     Government and Public Services and is the 9th recipient of 
     the IES Women in Sales Leadership award. In her role she is 
     committed to strengthening synergies across global Industries 
     and Government and Public Services with a focus on client 
     mission needs and solutions.
       Kristina Bouweiri is receiving the 2025 IES Entrepreneurial 
     Sales Leader of the Year and serves as president, CEO and 
     sole owner of Reston Limousine and Travel Service Inc. 
     Kristina has built a globally recognized transportation 
     business with a combination of innovative spirit, shrewd 
     adaptation and a tireless dedication to diversity and 
     international understanding.
       Jessica Scott is receiving the 2025 Institute for 
     Excellence in Sales Partner of the Year award. Jessica Scott 
     is a senior team lead and corporate new hire coach at 
     Carahsoft. She runs the IES partnership for Carahsoft and for 
     dozens of their partners. A graduate of the IES Women in 
     Sales Leadership Forum, she is a tireless advocate for her 
     sales team and Carahsofts technology partners.
       Souror Humpton is receiving the 2025 Institute for 
     Excellence in Sales Jay Nussbaum Rising Sales Star award. She 
     is a Federal Account sales leader at Oracle Corporation.
       Jack Daly is receiving the 2025 Institute for Excellence in 
     Sales Speaker of the Year award. Jack Daly is the king of 
     street-tested methods about smart selling. With a remarkable 
     30 plus year track record in sales, executive, and 
     entrepreneurial positions, has been called the best 
     professional sales trainer in America.
, I ask that my colleagues join me in recognizing Anthony 
Robbins, Beth McGrath, Kristina Bouweiri, Jessica Scott, Souror 
Humpton, and Jack Daly for their innovative and effective leadership 
and congratulating them on being recipients of the 2025 IES Sales 
Excellence Awards. I wish them the best in all of their future 
endeavors.
I rise today to recognize the 50th 
Anniversary of the Fall of Saigon.
  April 30, 2025, marks 50 years since the pivotal moment that signaled 
both the end of the Vietnam War and the beginning of a new chapter for 
millions of Vietnamese refugees--many of whom have made extraordinary 
contributions to communities across the United States, particularly in 
Northern Virginia.
  On April 30, 1975, the world watched as the city of Saigon fell. For 
many, it marked a day of loss, of country, of family, and of home. Yet 
it also marked the beginning of a remarkable story of resilience, 
strength, and hope.
  In the years that followed, hundreds of thousands fled Vietnam in 
search of liberty and opportunity, many finding a new beginning here in 
the United States.
  Northern Virginia is home to one of the largest and most vibrant 
Vietnamese American communities in the country.
  Places like the Eden Center stand as a testament of the rich cultural 
heritage and entrepreneurial spirit.
  The businesses, traditions, and values the Vietnamese American 
community upholds continue to enrich our region and make invaluable 
contributions.
  The Vietnamese American communitys story is one of perseverance, 
courage, and hope. Their contributions have made our communities 
stronger and better.
  Their journey embodies the ideals we hold dear: perseverance through 
hardship, strength in adversity, and an enduring hope for a better 
future.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in honoring this history, 
paying tribute to the lives lost and forever changed, and reaffirming 
our commitment to the universal values of freedom, democracy, and human 
dignity.
I rise today to recognize the 
distinguished service organization, Top Ladies of Distinction, Inc. 
(TLOD), and to celebrate the chartering of their Fairfax County 
Chapter.
  The story of Top Ladies of Distinction, Inc. began in 1964 with a 
simple lunch invitation. When Mrs. Willie Lee Glass was unable to 
attend a luncheon hosted by Mrs. Lyndon Baines Johnson, she asked Major 
Ozell M. Dean to attend in her place. Inspired by what she witnessed at 
that gathering, Major Dean reached out to Mrs. Glass and other 
distinguished Texas women to explore the possibility of forming an 
organization dedicated to addressing the challenges faced by youth in 
their communities.
  From its inaugural meeting on June 4, 1964, at Texas College in 
Tyler, Texas, TLOD has grown into a renowned national service 
organization with 135 chapters and over 5,300 members across the 
country. Their mission has expanded to include service initiatives for 
youth, women, senior citizens, community beautification, and strategic 
partnerships.
  A cornerstone of their efforts remains the Top Teens of America (TTA) 
program, which provides young people with educational, social, 
cultural, and economic development opportunities. Today, more than 
3,200 Top Teens benefit from this vital program.
  Now, in 2025, the Fairfax County Chapter joins this legacy of service 
under the leadership of:

       Amber R. Talbert, President
       Dr. Charlotte Lofton, 1st Vice President
       Millisa Lucas Gary, 2nd Vice President
       Angel Lungelow Cooper, Recording Secretary
       Indra Gibson, Treasurer
       Crystal Bivens, Financial Secretary
       Marlo Thomas Watson, TTA Advisor

  Additionally, the chapter is privileged to have Lady Tangie Lafaye 
Phair as its Organizer, guiding a distinguished group of charter 
members committed to advancing TLODs mission in Fairfax County. Under 
the visionary leadership of National Area II Director Lady Hope V. 
Ruffin and President and CEO, Lady Eddie Lee Marsh, Top Ladies of 
Distinction, Inc. continues to leave a lasting impact on communities 
across the Nation through service, mentorship, and advocacy.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in recognizing the 
Fairfax County Chapter of Top Ladies of Distinction, Inc. I commend 
these outstanding women for their dedication to service, mentorship, 
and community engagement.
I rise today to ask my colleagues to join me 
in congratulating Victoria Morton. Victoria is a member of Girl Scouts 
of Gulf Coast Florida, Troop 135, and has exemplified extraordinary 
leadership, innovative problem-solving, and a demonstrated commitment 
to making a lasting, positive impact, by earning the most prestigious 
award in Girl Scouting, the Gold Award.
  Gold Award Girl Scouts are recognized as trailblazers who are willing 
to tackle the most pressing challenges facing their communities and the 
world with measurable, sustainable, and far-reaching results. To earn 
the Girl Scout Gold Award, high school-age Girl Scouts must identify 
and investigate an issue they care about, devise a plan, and then lead 
a team of experts and community members to implement a project that 
produces lasting change. Over the course of 1-2 years, Gold Award Girl 
Scouts demonstrate significant initiative, commitment, and leadership, 
distinguishing them from their peers. Through their resourcefulness and 
perseverance, they embody the Girl Scout Law to truly make the world a 
better place.
  Victorias project, ``Pet Resource Central, in partnership with the 
Community Resource Center of Punta Gorda, the Harry Chapin Food Bank, 
the Animal Welfare League, the Suncoast Humane Society, and peers at 
Port Charlotte High School, was an excellent endeavor to address food 
insecurity and animal welfare in our community by creating a pantry for 
low-income pet owners. She collected donations to stock the pantry and 
hosted free workshops on affordable pet care. Additionally, Victoria 
provided free grooming services, including ear and teeth cleaning, nail 
trimming, and created a resource booklet with spay and neuter 
information. Victoria dedicated 136 hours to her project, which will 
have a lasting and positive impact on the community for years to come.
  On behalf of the 17th Congressional District of Florida, 
congratulations to Victoria Morton

for achieving the highest distinction in Girl Scouts, the Gold Award. 
We thank Victoria for her leadership and making such a positive, 
lasting change in our community.
Title IV of Senate Resolution 4, agreed to by the Senate of February 
4, 1977, calls for establishment of a system for a computerized 
schedule of all meetings and hearings of Senate committees, 
subcommittees, joint committees, and committees of conference. This 
title requires all such committees to notify the Office of the Senate 
Daily Digest--designated by the Rules Committee--of the time, place and 
purpose of the meetings, when scheduled and any cancellations or 
changes in the meetings as they occur.
  As an additional procedure along with the computerization of this 
information, the Office of the Senate Daily Digest will prepare this 
information for printing in the Extensions of Remarks section of the 
Congressional Record on Monday and Wednesday of each week.
  Meetings scheduled for Thursday, May 1, 2025 may be found in the 
Daily Digest of todays Record.

                                 MAY 6
     9:30 a.m.
       Committee on Armed Services
         To hold hearings to examine the nominations of Anthony 
           Tata, of Florida, to be Under Secretary for Personnel 
           and Readiness, and Katherine Sutton, of Illinois, to be 
           an Assistant Secretary, both of the Department of 
           Defense.
                                                            SD-G50
     10 a.m.
       Committee on Appropriations
       Subcommittee on Legislative Branch
         To hold hearings to examine proposed budget estimates for 
           fiscal year 2026 for Library of Congress and the 
           Architect of the Capitol.
                                                            SD-138
       Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation
         To hold hearings to examine field of streams, focusing on 
           the new channel guide for sports fans.
                                                            SR-253
     10:30 a.m.
       Committee on Appropriations
       Subcommittee on Agriculture, Rural Development, Food and 
           Drug Administration, and Related Agencies
         To hold hearings to examine proposed budget estimates for 
           fiscal year 2026 for the Department of Agriculture.
                                                            SD-124
     11:30 a.m.
       Committee on Veterans Affairs
         To hold hearings to examine veterans at the forefront, 
           focusing on the future at VA.
                                                            SD-106
     3 p.m.
       Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry
         To hold hearings to examine S. 1462, to improve forest 
           management activities on National Forest System land, 
           public land under the jurisdiction of the Bureau of 
           Land Management, and Tribal land to return resilience 
           to overgrown, fire-prone forested land.
                                                           SR-328A

                                 MAY 8
     10 a.m.
       Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation
         To hold hearings to examine winning the AI race, focusing 
           on strengthening United States capabilities in 
           computing and innovation.
                                                            SR-253

                                 MAY 12
     3:30 p.m.
       Committee on Armed Services
       Subcommittee on Strategic Forces
         To receive a closed briefing on space superiority.
                                                           SVC-217