I rise today to congratulate 
William Cofield Widner on his well-deserved retirement from Southern 
Company after 43 years of service.
  Headquartered in Atlanta, Georgia, Southern Company provides clean, 
safe, reliable and affordable energy to 9 million customers nationwide, 
including throughout the State of Georgia and its First Congressional 
District.
  Throughout his career, Cofields hard work, dedication and commitment 
to the communities where he has lived and served has made an indelible 
mark on our state and Nation.
  A Georgia native, Cofield began his career at Southern Company in 
1981 and has served in various roles including at Georgia Power and 
Southern Company Gas. A portion of his career focused on serving 
customers in his hometown of Newnan. He also supported Georgia Powers 
residential and commercial customers, resource planning, nuclear 
development and regulatory affairs organizations, which recently 
announced the successful operation of Americas first new carbon-free 
nuclear energy reactors in more than 30 years at Plant Vogtle.
  Additionally, Cofields work with the Georgia Department of Economic 
Developments ``Georgia Allies partnership has helped continually 
enhance the states business climate, keeping Georgia ranked as the 
number-one state for business according to Area Development magazine.
  On behalf of the people of the State of Georgia, I congratulate 
Cofield and wish him, his wife Jane, his sons Drew and Jack, and his 
grandson Bo the very best as he enters the next phase of his life.
I am pleased to honor the devotion, wisdom, 
and innovative

philanthropy of a Pikes Peak community champion, Bill Moritz. He was 
prematurely taken from us on March 16, 2024 at only 72 years of age by 
cancer. Bill was a man of unwavering faith and tireless dedication to 
the Lord, to community service, and to mission-based companies.
  After earning a bachelors degree from the University of Missouri, 
Bill met his wife Mary Lee Martin in 1975. Together they raised four 
children In 1985, Bill earned a Juris Doctorate degree from the O.W. 
Coburn School of Law, embarking on a career and path that would impact 
countless lives.
  A Christian discipleship ministry, The Navigators, brought the Moritz 
family to Colorado Springs in 1985. Bill founded Moritz &amp; Associates, 
PC in 1988 and practiced law in Colorado Springs for over 35 years. He 
specialized in estate planning, non-profit organizations, and business 
law. He was lead attorney for From Success 2 Significance which 
provides training and strategies that empower generous families to live 
a more significant life.
  Out of personal tragedy in 1998, when the Moritzs daughter Breanna 
Joy was killed in a car accident, there emerged Joy to the World 
Foundation Thailand. Bill and Mary Lee founded this anti-trafficking 
ministry to protect vulnerable children and families in northern 
Thailand. His passion for wise and impactful philanthropy led him to 
co-found a community foundation in Colorado Springs in 1989. Bill 
served as the Executive Director of the New Horizons Foundation until 
his death. In 2003 Bill founded Joy to the World Foundation to help 
philanthropic families and ministry professionals multiply the impact 
of their generosity and service.
  Bills 35 years of wise counsel helped numerous ministries, including 
among may others: The LeTourneau University Foundation, Navigators, 
Baptist Bible College and Seminary, Harvest Workers, Christian 
Broadcasting Network, International Bible Society, Compassion 
International, Oral Roberts University, Seattle Pacific University, 
Young Life, The Christian and Missionary Alliance Denomination, Summit 
Ministries, Christian Blind Mission International, HCJB World Radio, 
Mission Aviation Fellowship, Mission of Mercy, and the YMCA. Bill also 
authored a book, Unlocking The Full Potential of Your Assets; Creative 
Uses of the Charitable Remainder Unitrust.
  Bill is survived by his devoted wife of 48 years, their three 
children--Joni, Josh, and Amy--along with their spouses, and 11 
cherished grandchildren.
, I can personally attest to the outstanding life of Bill 
Moritz. We practiced law together for a short time early in our 
careers. I saw firsthand his integrity, his Christian commitment, and 
his devotion to his family.
  Today I ask my colleagues to honor a life of significant generosity, 
philanthropy, and innovation. Because of Bill Moritzs life Colorados 
Fifth Congressional District and indeed the world are a better place.
I rise today to recognize the National 
Society Daughters of the American Revolution and their effort to 
commemorate the men and women who achieved American independence, 
realizing that those Patriots believed in the noble cause of liberty 
and served valiantly to found a new nation.
  More directly, I would like to acknowledge cooperative spirit of the 
Flower Mound, Benjamin Lyon, Cross Timbers, Captain Molly Corbin, 
Peters Colony, and Shawnee Trail Chapters of the National Society 
Daughters of the American Revolution who have united to promote 
Americas upcoming 250th birthday and endeavor to convey its relevance 
to our society. This cooperative spirit honors the tradition begun by 
the pioneers who settled the southern community of Denton County, now 
known as Copper Canyon.
  On Saturday, April 27, 2024, the Flower Mound Chapter met to hold an 
official grave marking and dedication honoring Martha ``Patsey 
Brockett Wakefield (1797-1873), one of Denton Countys early 
matriarchs, with an official grave marking and dedication at Chinns 
Chapel Cemetery in Copper Canyon, Denton County, Texas.
  As the youngest daughter of Revolutionary War Patriot William 
Ebenezer Brockett, born in 1797, Martha Brockett married Henry 
Wakefield, Jr. in January of 1817. Henry Wakefield, Jr. was the son of 
Revolutionary War Patriot Henry Wakefield, himself the offspring of 
Revolutionary War Patriot Charles Wakefield.
  In 1853 Henry Wakefield, Jr. and his wife, Martha ``Patsey Brockett 
Wakefield, moved with their large family to 320 acres of land Henry 
purchased for $320 in Denton County, Texas. In 1859, Silas Wakefield 
and his brother Simpson Burke Wakefield, two of Henry and Martha 
``Patseys 11 children, and among 9 who survived into adulthood, each 
purchased adjoining land grants of 160 acres nearby. Located on land 
purchased by Simpson, the Denton County Town of Waketon was named after 
the family.
  Simpsons wife, Jane, with two other women, and Mary Stowe Chinn, 
founded Chinns Chapel Methodist Church, believed to be the oldest 
church and school in Denton County.
  Originally named Antioch, the chapel was built from donated logs 
provided by settlers visiting the nearby Lockhart Spring. In 1858 the 
community came together and assembled the logs into the cabin structure 
that served as a church, school and as a temporary shelter for new 
settlers as they built their own homes. As settlers died from various 
causes, the settlers were frequently buried near the log cabin chapel. 
When Simpson and Jane Wakefield died a month a part in 1861, they were 
among the early burials in the Chinns Chapel Cemetery.
  The Christians worshipping in the log cabin were offered the service 
of a Methodist circuit rider preacher who would arrive regularly about 
once every three months. They sought membership in the Texas Conference 
of the Methodist Episcopal Church and were admitted in 1872. They 
renamed the log cabin ``Chinns Chapel Methodist Church in honor of 
the Chinn Family. Early day camp meetings were held each August in the 
valley below, an area that served as a campground for meetings at the 
Chinn Chapel Campground. The road beside it was part of the main road 
from Southern Denton County to the County seat and was called Chinns 
Chapel Road. The area became well known in Denton County as the Chinns 
Chapel Community, still recognized today with The Chinns Chapel Log 
Cabin still standing in the Chinns Chapel Cemetery on what is now 
known as Chinn Chapel Road.
  The legacy of Martha ``Patsey is still evident today in the 
familiar Southern Denton landmarks that bear the names of her son and 
the efforts of her daughter-in-law and the Chinn family with whom they 
shared the values of the pioneer farming families: a love of family, 
God, and country; a spirit of community cooperation; practical problem 
solving with a know-how that comes from living on the land; and a 
respect for the richness and beauty of the rural Texas landscape.
  On behalf of the 26th Congressional District of Texas, I honor Martha 
``Patsey Brockett Wakefield and her spirit, exemplifying the 
fortitude and gratitude that are the foundations of Southern Denton 
County. Her descendants have left their imprint on this community for 
the over one million residents of this County they established, and I 
recognize their important role in establishing their rich history and 
the North Texas quality of life we are grateful to share.
I rise today to honor the life of Sammy 
McDowell, who was a community leader, restaurateur, and friend to all.
  Sammy grew up in Minneapolis and was a fixture in the community 
throughout his life. He worked in food service for many years before 
starting his own catering service and restaurant. His flagship 
restaurant, Sammys Avenue Eatery opened in 2012 on West Broadway 
Avenue in North Minneapolis. Not only has Sammys served delicious food 
for over a decade, it has also become an important gathering place for 
the community. He had recently expanded and began operating a Sammys 
Avenue Eatery pop-up in Saint Paul, in a space which features Black-
owned businesses. Even as a business owner, Sammy never compromised his 
generosity towards others and always went the extra mile to check on 
the wellbeing of his friends, as well as his customers. Sammys passion 
for his community was contagious, and I know that the spaces he created 
will continue to be sources of friendship, inspiration, and comfort.
  Sammy was also a well known devoted member of Shiloh Temple and sang 
in the choir there for many years. He was worshiping among loved ones 
at Shiloh just before his death. He had a hand in many things 
throughout the community, and was always a familiar face at events 
around the city. This past week, a balloon release was held in several 
U.S. cities to celebrate Sammys life. These nationwide celebrations 
are a testament to Sammys admirable ability to make an impression on 
those around him. His company will be dearly missed by those who had 
the privilege to know him.
, I ask my colleagues to join me in celebrating the 
incredibly full life of Sammy McDowell and recognizing his 
accomplishments in entrepreneurship and community-building, and his 
immeasurable impact on the people and city of Minneapolis.
HONORING THE CAREER AND RETIREMENT OF DR. ROBERT `BOB PRUDHOMME
I rise today to honor the career 
and retirement of Dr. Robert `Bob Prudhomme, a Senior Scholar and 
Professor at Princeton University whos work pioneering key facets of 
COVID-19 vaccination distribution helped save millions of lives across 
the globe.
  A Mercer County resident, Bob is a retired Captain of the United 
States Army who proudly served his country during the Vietnam War. 
After his bravery in Vietnam, Bob was an environmental engineer in the 
U.S. Army Armaments Command where he received the Bronze Star and an 
Army Commendations Medal.
  Bob excelled in his studies, earning a Bachelor of Science in 
Chemical Engineering from Stanford University, a Masters Degree in 
Environmental Science and Public Policy from Harvard University, and 
finally a Doctoral Degree in Chemical Engineering from the University 
of Wisconsin--Madison. After this illustrious academic career, he began 
his tenure at Princeton University in 1978 as an adjunct professor in 
chemical engineering.
  Bob has spent these last 46 years educating the next generation of 
engineers in New Jersey, and dedicating his own research to developing 
technologies that help make cost effective medicines and vaccinations. 
His work proved invaluable at the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. The 
technology he developed allowed for quick dissemination of COVID-19 
vaccinations that helped save millions of lives across the globe. This 
technology is just one of many achievements Bob has pioneered 
throughout his long career. His research has been published over 400 
times in national and international publications and his work has 
received support from the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation. He has 
also received many accolades and honors throughout his career, 
including recently being elected to the National Academy of 
Engineering.
  Not only is Bob an exceptional engineer and researcher, he has been 
an active member at Princeton Community Church for over two decades. It 
was here that he met his wife, Dottie. The couple now continues to 
bring the community together through twice-monthly bible study sessions 
at their home. Husband, father to six, and grandfather to eleven, Bob 
is always available to read a story, take a kid fishing, or perform a 
scientific experiment with his family. Students, colleagues, and 
neighbors all know Bobs passion for fly fishing through the many trips 
with friends he has planned to fishing locations across the country.
  Bob embodies the spirit of service that makes me proud to represent 
people like him in New Jerseys Third Congressional District. We are 
lucky to have him as a member of our community.
I rise today to honor WWII veteran and 
Arkansas Native, Mr. William Toombs, who will soon celebrate his 100th 
birthday.
a flight engineer gunner on both B17s and B24s 
with the 493rd bomb group of the 8th Army Air Force, also known as the 
``Mighty 8th.
  He flew his first mission on June 6, 1944--D-Day--and went on to 
carry out over twenty successful missions.
  For his heroism, Toombs was awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross, 
as well as several Air Medals and foreign decorations. In 2021, he was 
inducted into the Arkansas Military Veterans Hall of Fame.
``Mighty 8th, 
sharing their story in numerous interviews, and has continued to serve

his fellow veterans through his membership in several veterans 
organizations.
  I thank Mr. William Toombs for his service and congratulate him on 
his 100th birthday.
Ms DeLAURO. Mr. Speaker, it is with my deepest thanks and sincere 
appreciation that I rise today to recognize William Samuel, the 
Director of Government Affairs at the AFL-CIO, as family, friends, and 
colleagues gather to wish him well as he marks his retirement from a 
decades long career fighting on behalf of Americas working families. 
Bill has been an extraordinary leader, advocate and friend. And, while 
I have no doubt that he will continue to stay engaged, the AFL-CIO and 
the labor movement will not be the same without him.
  A graduate of Oberlin College and the George Washington University 
Law Center, Bill knew early on that he wanted to focus his professional 
life on labor law. He began his career as a legislative representative 
for the National Treasury Employees Union and the American Federation 
of Government Employees, representing federal employees across a 
multitude of agencies.
  Bill went on to serve as the chief lobbyist at the United Mine 
Workers of America (UMWA). At the time, the UMWA had not found its 
voice and he helped to turn that around. For Bill, the fight to ensure 
safe working conditions, fair wages, and secure health and retirement 
benefits has always been a core value. It is his deep commitment to 
those values that have guided his career. That was perhaps most 
profoundly exemplified as Bill led the successful effort to pass 
federal legislation guaranteeing lifetime health benefits to hundreds 
of thousands of retired miners and their dependents. In doing so, he 
quite literally changed their lives.
  In 1995, Bill transitioned to federal service when he Joined the 
Clinton Administration, serving as associate deputy secretary of labor 
under Secretaries Robert Reich and Alexis Herman. In 2000, Bill became 
senior policy adviser to Vice President Al Gore, a role in which he was 
both a principal adviser on labor policy issues and liaison to 
organized labor. This professional diversion allowed him the 
opportunity to shape and implement policies that he had long advocated 
for.
  Following his federal service, Bill returned to the labor movement, 
joining the AFL-CIO where he served as the Director of Government 
Affairs for nearly twenty-five years. Made up of 55 affiliated unions 
and representing more than 12.5 million working Americans, it takes a 
unique combination of organization, insight, and leadership to work 
with such various entities to create a unified message and agenda. Bill 
has a unique talent for building consensus--a skill set which he has 
used throughout his career. Coordinating with each member union, 
engaging with leadership as well as rank and file, while also providing 
guidance and advocacy to Congressional Members and staff, Bill has 
built a distinguished reputation with all those who have had the 
opportunity to work with him. I, like many others, am so grateful to 
have benefited from his expertise and counsel. I thank him for that as 
well as his many years of friendship and support.
  In a professional career that has spanned more than six decades, Bill 
Samuel has left an indelible mark on the labor movement in America. 
Many of those whose lives have been improved by his work will never 
meet or know Bill. Throughout his career he has been a champion for 
working Americans, standing up time and time again to protect their 
rights to safe working conditions, fair and livable wages, as well as 
secure health and retirement benefits. Today, as he marks his 
retirement, I extend my heartfelt congratulations and deepest thanks to 
Bill for his outstanding service. My very best wishes to him, his wife, 
Tracy; and his children Jack and Lucy, for many more years of health 
and happiness as he begins this new life chapter.
I rise today to recognize the union of my 
constituents and good friends, Aman Chandi and Udhay Kahlon, two 
individuals whose relationship began by chance and has grown into a 
commitment rooted in their shared traditions and love. With genuine 
happiness, I offer them my congratulations on their engagement and 
upcoming marriage.
  At an airport surrounded by travelers, Aman and Udhay met by chance, 
and were encouraged to pursue one another by friends and

family. Their connection grew over dinner conversations, during which 
they discovered their common values, dreams, and goals.
  Their relationship, developed through many hours of video calls and 
meaningful conversations, blossomed into love. This was formally 
recognized at a three-day Roka event, which ended with a proposal 
confirming their commitment. Aman and Udhays experience shows that 
love can find us when we least expect it.
  As we look forward to their wedding, we are reminded of the rich 
cultural heritage that their union celebrates. From the vibrant colors 
of the Mehndi event to the Sangeet ceremony, where music and laughter 
pave the way for unforgettable memories, their celebrations vividly 
represent tradition and modernity. The Haldi, Choora, and the sacred 
Anand Karaj ceremonies hold deep significance, marking the beginning of 
their life with blessings, happiness, and the promise of a bright 
future.
  The marriage of Aman and Udhay signifies not just the union of two 
individuals, but the coming together of two families with shared values 
of hard work, community, and ambition. This union is set to expand upon 
these legacies, creating the foundation of a new chapter that promises 
to enrich their communities further and inspire future generations 
through a blend of tradition, integrity, and shared goals.
, as Aman and Udhay stand on the brink of their future, 
they do so with the support of their families, the blessings of their 
traditions, and the love that has brought them together. In celebrating 
Aman and Udhay, we celebrate the beauty of coming together, the 
strength of familial bonds, and the promise of a future filled with 
love, happiness, and prosperity.
  On behalf of Californias 25th District, I extend my warmest wishes 
to Aman, Udhay, and their families. May their union be blessed with 
love, laughter, and a lifetime of happiness. As they begin their shared 
future, let us celebrate the love that has brought them together.
  Congratulations to Aman and Udhay. May their story inspire all, and 
their lives together be filled with joy and fulfillment.
due to unforeseen circumstances, I was 
unable to cast my votes for H.R. 4866 and H.R. 4755. Had I been 
present, I would have voted YEA on Roll Call No. 153, and YEA on Roll 
Call No. 154.
I rise today to recognize Aisyss Amaya 
for earning the Arvada Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth Award.
  Aisyss has overcome many challenges along her journey to success, 
demonstrating perseverance at every step. Students who strive to make 
the most of their education, like Aisyss, develop crucial skills and a 
work ethic that will guide them for the rest of their lives. This award 
is a testament to Aisysss hard work, determination, and perseverance 
at Jefferson Jr./Sr. High School and is clearly just the beginning of a 
bright and promising future.
  It is my honor to congratulate Aisyss Amaya on achieving the Arvada 
Wheat Ridge Service Ambassadors for Youth Award.
I rise today to recognize and honor the 
unique contributions of one of my constituents, Mr. Alan Wikett. Mr. 
Wikett is the founder of Warrior 321, an anti-human trafficking 
awareness group. According to those who have worked alongside him, Mr. 
Wiketts passion for prevention and assistance is unrivaled. Though he 
is supposed to be retired, he is constantly on the road educating 
different organizations and gathering new intel to help the 
organization better keep our community safe. He has spearheaded many 
successful initiatives to educate victims of human trafficking about 
the availability of services that can keep them safe and at-risk 
populations about how to avoid becoming a victim. Mr. Wikett has also 
spoken to countless civic organizations to help garner support and 
raise awareness about the dangers of human trafficking.
  It is clear that Mr. Wikett has made a profoundly positive impact on 
our community and on the lives of countless people he has worked with 
in the fight against the horrific crime of human trafficking. I am 
grateful for his service.