I rise today to celebrate the remarkable 
career and leadership of John L. Humphries as he retires as President 
and General Manager of WYFF 4 after more than four decades in broadcast 
television.
  John led two of Hearst Televisions most honored and successful 
brands for eighteen years, most recently leading Hearsts NBC affiliate 
in the Greenville-Spartanburg-Anderson, South Carolina and Asheville, 
North Carolina, television market. He is said to have built upon the 
culture of excellence in journalism and community service in both 
markets.
  In 2018, Broadcasting &amp; Cable named him General Manager of the Year 
for mid-size television markets as the station earned a Southeast 
Regional Emmy for Outstanding Newscast and, in 2022, it received a 
prestigious national Edward R. Murrow Award. The many state and 
regional achievements have included three consecutive Associated Press 
of South Carolinas Outstanding News Operation in 2017, 2018, and 2019 
and the South Carolina Association of Broadcasters Station of the Year 
recognition in 2021.
  Before joining Hearst Television, John was General Sales Manager for 
WBTV in Charlotte, North Carolina, and held the same position at WSPA-
TV/WASV-TV in the Greenville-Spartanburg market. He began his career at 
Charlottes WSOC-TV, initially as a Production Specialist.
  He holds a bachelors degree in Speech from Appalachian State 
University, in Boone, North Carolina, for which he served on the Alumni 
Council and currently sits on the Department of Communications 
Professional Advisory Board.
  Among his industry and charitable associations, John serves as 
president of the South Carolina Broadcasters Association Board of 
Directors, the board for the Greenville Chamber of Commerce, and the 
South Carolina Chapter of the Cystic Fibrosis Foundation. In 2016, he 
was named one of the regions 50 Most Influential People by Greenville 
Business Magazine.
, as John signs off and embarks on a well-deserved 
retirement, it is a privilege to be able to serve the Third District of 
South Carolina and to celebrate those who make a difference in our 
community.
HONORING BOB GASTS MILITARY SERVICE AND CONTRIBUTIONS TO OUR COUNTRY, 
     KOSCIUSKO COUNTY, AND INDIANAS SECOND CONGRESSIONAL DISTRICT
I rise to recognize and honor decorated World 
War II veteran and devoted member of the Kosciusko County community, 
Bob Gast.

  Born more than a century ago, Bob embodies what it means to be part 
of the ``Greatest Generation. When the forces of fascism and tyranny 
threatened the peace, security, and freedom of millions, Bob answered 
the call to serve our Nation as a soldier in the United States Army. 
During one of the most crucial periods of fighting on the Western Front 
in the Second World War, Bob led his Army platoon during the Battle of 
Hurtgen Forest. A Second Lieutenant at the time, Bob earned the Silver 
Star after being shot in the arm. The Silver Star is one of the most 
prestigious medals of honor our Nation can bestow on a servicemember, 
and it appropriately recognizes Bobs valor in combat and his gallantry 
in action against the enemy. Bobs Silver Star, along with his Purple 
Heart, Bronze Star, Combat Infantry Badge, World War II Victory Medal, 
and European-African-Middle Eastern Campaign Medal, are all physical 
proof and outward symbols of Bobs inner fortitude, leadership 
abilities, and his unwavering commitment to duty and service.
  President Ronald Reagan reminded us that freedom is fragile and must 
constantly be fought for and vigilantly guarded by each generation. 
That noble mission is exactly what Bob helped carry out when he wore 
the uniform of the United States Military. Because of the service and 
sacrifice of warriors like Bob, generations of Americans have been able 
to experience the blessings of liberty and live in a land that is free. 
For that, all of us owe Bob and his fellow veterans a debt we can never 
fully repay.
  Bobs dedication to service did not stop when he returned home to 
Indiana after battle. Bob has been very active in a number of community 
organizations throughout Kosciusko County, and the Warsaw City Council, 
the Rotary Club, Salvation Army, Warsaw Evangelical Community Church, 
and Mobile Meals program have all benefited greatly from Bobs 
involvement. Simply put, Bob epitomizes what it means to put ``Service 
Above Self.
  Despite all these impressive accolades and countless testimonials 
from those he has helped over the years, perhaps Bobs best legacy are 
his and his wife Marges seven children, and their more than two dozen 
grandchildren and great-grandchildren.
  After more than a century of life well lived, I join countless 
Hoosiers in celebrating Bob Gast and in thanking him for his loyal 
service and the many, many contributions he has made to the Kosciusko 
County community, Indianas Second Congressional District, and our 
country. May God bless Bob Gast.
HONORING CHARLES GARNERS SERVICE IN UNIFORM AND CONTRIBUTIONS TO OUR 
          COUNTRY AND INDIANAS SECOND CONGRESSIONAL DISTRICT
I rise to recognize and offer my praise and 
gratitude to World War II veteran, American hero, and 101 -year-old 
Kosciusko County resident Charles Garner.
  Born in Fulton County on July 3, 1923, Charles Garner is a decorated 
veteran who honorably served our Nation in uniform, and who has shown 
his commitment to making Kosciusko County an even better place to live, 
learn, work, and raise a family after he returned home from battle.
  Charles enlisted in the Army Reserves in 1942 during the height of 
World War II while attending Indiana Central College in Indianapolis. 
Charles service in uniform saw him serve in a mortar battalion, once 
digging five foxholes in two days while being surrounded by the German 
Army during the Battle of the Bulge, and it took him across Normandy, 
northern France, central Europe, and the Rhineland during different 
campaigns and battles. After his service in Europe, Charles was on his 
way to fight in the Pacific Theater in Japan when he and his fellow 
servicemembers learned that the war was finally over.
  Because of his honorable and valorous service, Charles was awarded a 
Good Conduct Medal, one service stripe, two overseas bars, and a 
European African Middle Eastern Theater Ribbon with five bronze stars.
  Upon returning home, Charles attended Indiana Central College and 
received a masters degree from Indiana University, which he used to 
launch a career in education that took him from teacher to Leesburg 
School principal to Warsaw Community High School assistant principal 
over the course of 38 years.
  After more than a century and still going of living life to the 
fullest, I am happy to join countless Hoosiers, including his three 
sons and dozens and dozens of grandchildren, great-grandchildren, and 
great-great-grandchildren, in commending Charles Garner for his brave 
military service and thanking him for the many contributions he has 
made to Kosciusko County, Indianas Second District, and our country. 
May God bless Charles Garner.
I rise today to pay tribute to an 
invaluable leader of the Defense Appropriations Subcommittee, Johnnie 
Kaberle, for 30 years of exemplary dedication and service to our 
Nation.
  In 2020, Johnnie took over as the Minority Clerk of the Defense 
Appropriations Subcommittee. From the creation of the Accelerate the 
Procurement and Fielding of Innovative Technologies or ``APFIT 
program, which provides vital bridge funding to promising new defense 
companies, to the preservation of the USS Fort Worth from premature 
decommissioning, she successfully championed robust national security 
spending and Republican priorities in the enacted Fiscal Year 2020 
through Fiscal Year 2023 Defense Appropriations acts.
  After serving ably and dual-hatted as the House Appropriations 
Committee Deputy Staff Director and Defense Subcommittee Minority 
Clerk, Johnnie rightfully took on an even more challenging and 
impactful role as the Defense Appropriations Subcommittee Majority 
Staff Director and Clerk when Republicans won the Majority in 2022. In 
this role, she led a staff of fourteen defense and intelligence experts 
in the drafting and passage of the Fiscal Year 2024 Defense 
Appropriations Act and House passage of the Fiscal Year 2025 Defense 
Appropriations bill. At over $800 billion per fiscal year, this bill is 
the largest and most complex appropriations bill for the Nation and in 
the world. Johnnies innate ability to build coalitions across Members 
of Congress, senior administration officials, and industry executives, 
to achieve United States national security objectives is truly 
breathtaking to witness and invaluable to a Subcommittee Chairman.
  Among her many accomplishments as Majority Clerk, Johnnies will 
possibly be most remembered for spearheading my vision to accelerate 
the adoption of innovation across the Department of Defense. Because of 
her efforts, Congress allocated nearly $2.5 billion toward defense 
innovation, including rapid procurement and fielding of promising 
defense technologies through the Defense Innovation Unit, the creation 
and funding of APFIT, and the support of the Office of Strategic 
Capital. This will have a lasting impact on our national security and 
ensure continued American military supremacy.
  On a personal note, Johnnie has been a trusted advisor and friend to 
the Members of the Subcommittee on both sides of the aisle. Her 
partnership with Chair Emeritus Kay Granger, Chairman Tom Cole, and 
myself has been instrumental to our efforts to make the Department of 
Defense a more agile and effective organization. Her contributions to 
Americas warfighters will endure long after her tenure in the House of 
Representatives ends, and I know she will continue to do great work to 
advance our national defense.
  On behalf of a grateful Nation, I join my colleagues today in 
recognizing and commending Johnnie for her service to our country. We 
wish her all the best in her future endeavors.
I rise today to honor Jim 
Provenza for his exceptional career in public service and his 
unwavering commitment to our community. After 16 years of service on 
the Yolo County Board of Supervisors and over 40 years working in state 
and local government, Mr. Provenza will soon retire, leaving a legacy 
of compassion, justice, and dedication to our community.
  Born in Buffalo, New York, in 1955, and raised in San Diego, Mr. 
Provenza pursued a Bachelor of Arts in Political Science from the 
University of California, Santa Barbara, followed by a Juris Doctor 
from the University of California, Davis Law School. After graduating, 
During this time, he helped low-income 
individuals gain critical access to the justice system, championing the 
rights of domestic violence survivors, tenants, and victims of civil 
rights violations.
a counsel in the California 
State Legislature, where he authored Californias hate crime law and 
pursued criminal justice reforms. His tenure as Special Assistant for 
the Los Angeles District Attorneys Office from 1993 to 2016 was marked 
by his leadership on issues of public safety. In this role, he worked 
to combat gang violence, fraud, and abuse, while also leading 
initiatives to reform the juvenile justice system, tighten 
environmental protections, and improve workplace safety.
  In 2009, Mr. Provenza joined the Yolo County Board of Supervisors, 
where he served with distinction for 16 years, including three terms as 
Chair. Over his tenure, Mr. Provenza helped secure the funding and 
approval for a new library in South Davis, advocated for the financial 
stability and growth of the Yolo Crisis Nursery, and championed efforts 
to allocate American Rescue Plan funds to communities most in need. His 
decisive action and sound leadership were instrumental during the 
COVID-19 pandemic, ensuring the protection of businesses, essential 
workers, and the most vulnerable members of our community.
  An advocate for environmental conservation, Mr. Provenza authored 
Yolo Countys Climate Resolution, setting a target for the county to 
become carbon-negative by 2030. His commitment to conservation also 
extended to the Yolo Bypass Wildlife Area and the Sacramento-San 
Joaquin Delta, where he worked with our neighboring counties, state and 
federal agencies, and local stakeholders to preserve our regions 
natural resources.
He co-founded and 
chaired the Yolo Healthy Aging Alliance, organized the first Yolo 
County Aging Summit, and has served on multiple aging and healthcare 
committees. Through these roles, he has coordinated essential services 
and advocated for aging populations across the county.
, on behalf of our Yolo County community, I extend my 
gratitude to Mr. Jim Provenza for his dedication, his integrity, and 
his profound impact on our communities. His legacy of public service 
serves as an inspiration to us all, and it is fitting and proper that 
we honor him here today.
I had to miss votes on December 6, 2024, to 
travel back to Illinois. Had I been present, I would have voted YEA on 
Roll Call No. 492.
it is my distinct honor to recognize an 
organization that has done so much to make Maine a national leader in 
energy efficiency.
  This past October, in recognition of its efforts to accelerate the 
replacement of fossil fuel appliances with more efficient electric 
alternatives in our state, Efficiency Maine received the ``Leader of 
the Pack award from the American Council for an Energy-Efficient 
Economy. The fact that this award is only given once every five years 
is a testament to just how impactful Efficiency Maines programs have 
been.
  Between 2010 and 2023, the share of Maine households that used 
heating fuel as their primary heat source fell from 70 percent to 50 
percent. Thats a remarkable improvement--and the programs offered by 
Efficiency Maine have played a significant role in this trend. Its 
initiatives in the areas of consumer-education, income-differentiated 
rebates, pilot programs for new technology, and close collaboration 
with local tradespeople have been truly remarkable.
  By promoting the transition from fossil fuel-dependent heating 
systems to those that rely on clean, renewable energy, Efficiency Maine 
is helping our state reduce its carbon footprint--proving that ``going 
green can mean ``saving green, too.
  Organizations like Efficiency Maine are absolutely critical to 
helping citizens embrace the power they have to bring about a greener, 
more sustainable future for our country. I thank them for their 
incredible work, their tireless service, and their steadfast commitment 
to Maines growing green economy.
Title IV of Senate Resolution 4, agreed to by the Senate of February 
4, 1977, calls for establishment of a system for a computerized 
schedule of all meetings and hearings of Senate committees, 
subcommittees, joint committees, and committees of conference. This 
title requires all such committees to notify the Office of the Senate 
Daily Digest--designated by the Rules Committee--of the time, place and 
purpose of the meetings, when scheduled and any cancellations or 
changes in the meetings as they occur.
  As an additional procedure along with the computerization of this 
information, the Office of the Senate Daily Digest will prepare this 
information for printing in the Extensions of Remarks section of the 
Congressional Record on Monday and Wednesday of each week.
  Meetings scheduled for Tuesday, December 10, 2024 may be found in the 
Daily Digest of todays Record.

     9:45 a.m.
       Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs
         Business meeting to consider the nominations of Caroline 
           A. Crenshaw, of the District of Columbia, to be a 
           Member of the Securities and Exchange Commission, and 
           Gordon I. Ito, of Hawaii, to be a Member of the 
           Financial Stability Oversight Council; to be 
           immediately followed by a hearing to examine consumer 
           protection, focusing on protecting workers money and 
           fighting for the dignity of work.
                                                            SD-538
     2:30 p.m.
       Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation
       Subcommittee on Communications, Media, and Broadband
         To hold hearings to examine communications networks 
           safety and security.
                                                            SR-253
       Select Committee on Intelligence
         To receive a closed briefing on certain intelligence 
           matters.
                                                            SH-219
     2:45 p.m.
       Committee on Rules and Administration
         To hold an oversight hearing to examine the United States 
           Capitol Police.
                                                            SR-301

     10 a.m.
       Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation
         Business meeting to consider the nominations of David 
           Michael Capozzi, of Maryland, Ronald L. Batory, of New 
           Mexico, Elaine Marie Clegg, of Idaho, and Lanhee J. 
           Chen, of California, each to be a Director of the 
           Amtrak Board of Directors, Lisa T. Ballance, of Oregon, 
           to be a Member of the Marine Mammal Commission, Felix 
           R. Sanchez, of the District of Columbia, and Adam 
           Jeffrey White, of Virginia, both to be a Member of the 
           Board of Directors of the Corporation for Public 
           Broadcasting, L. E. Sola, of Florida, to be a Federal 
           Maritime Commissioner, and routine lists in the Coast 
           Guard; to be immediately followed by a Subcommittee on 
           Aviation Safety, Operations, and Innovation hearing to 
           examine U.S. Air Traffic Control systems, personnel, 
           and safety.
                                                            SR-253
       Committee on the Judiciary
         Business meeting to consider S. 1306, to reauthorize the 
           COPS ON THE BEAT grant program, S. 2082, to make 
           technical corrections relating to the Justice Against 
           Sponsors of Terrorism Act, and the nominations of 
           Benjamin J. Cheeks, to be United States District Judge 
           for the Southern District of California, and Serena 
           Raquel Murillo, to be United States District Judge for 
           the Central District of California.
                                                            SD-G50
       Special Committee on Aging
         To hold hearings to examine empowering people with 
           disabilities to live, work, learn, and thrive.
                                                            SD-106