I rise today to celebrate Mrs. Dolores L. 
Clemons on her 100th birthday. As she celebrates her 100th birthday, 
her life story is a beautiful tapestry woven with love and resilience.
  Born on October 8, 1924, in Coudersport, Pennsylvania, Mrs. Clemons 
is a devoted mother of nine and embodies the spirit of caring within 
her family and to everyone she meets.
  After 21 years of service, Mrs. Clemons retired from Buffalo General 
Hospital, where she dedicated her career as a nursery technician caring 
for newborn and infant children and later as a nurse in the emergency 
room, touching the lives of countless patients with her compassionate 
care.
  Over the years, she has witnessed many changes in her life and 
community, yet her love for those around her has remained a constant 
source of strength. Known as the best baker in the family, she has 
created countless sweet memories, sharing her delicious treats with 
loved ones.

  As an avid traveler, she cherished journeys to visit her siblings 
across the country, celebrating the bonds of family. Married for over 
60 years to Morris Clemons, Mrs. Clemons life is a testament to 
enduring love. As she looks to the future, her goals remain simple yet 
profound: to stay healthy and continue sharing her warmth and wisdom 
with those around her.
  Today, we thank Mrs. Dolores L. Clemons for being a truly remarkable 
woman, and her legacy of care and kindness with surely live on for 
generations to come.
I rise today to honor Mrs. Kimberly 
Collins-Jones on the occasion of her 62nd birthday. Born on October 11, 
1964, in Buffalo, New York, Mrs. Collins-Jones is a cherished wife to 
Ulysses Jones and a devoted mother of two. She enriches the lives of 
her loved ones, ensuring that every gathering is filled with laughter, 
love, and delectable food.
  In addition to her culinary talents, Mrs. Collins-Jones is a 
dedicated member of True Bethel Baptist Church, where she has devoted 
two decades of service. She also plays an important role in the 
Paramount Order of Eastern Stars, exemplifying her commitment to 
community service.
  As the proud owner of Phat Katz in the heart of the University 
District, Mrs. Collins-Jones has transformed her dream into a vibrant 
reality. Since opening in May 2016, her restaurant has become a beloved 
institution in Buffalo, renowned for its soul food that nourishes both 
body and spirit. It is a place where families gather, friendships 
blossom, and memories are created over delicious meals.
-Jones culinary journey is deeply rooted in her 
upbringing in Buffalo, where growing up in a large family of nine 
instilled in her the understanding that cooking is about more than 
sustenance; it is about love, tradition, and togetherness. Inspired by 
her mothers ability to create feasts that brought joy to their home, 
her passion for cooking continues to shine through every dish she 
serves.
  Today, we celebrate Mrs. Kimberly Collins-Jones for her remarkable 
achievements, her generous spirit, and the countless lives she has 
touched. Heres to 62 wonderful years and many more to come.
CELEBRATING THE INAUGURATION OF SUNY ERIES 13TH PRESIDENT DR. ADIAM 
                              of new york
I rise today to celebrate the inauguration 
of Dr. Adiam Tsegai, SUNY Eries 13th President.
  Dr. Adiam Tsegai is an alumnus of SUNY Erie Community College where 
she earned her Associates Degree in Liberal Arts and Social Science. 
Continuing her education at the University of Buffalo, Dr. Tsegai 
earned a Bachelor of Arts in Psychology and African American Studies. 
She also received a Masters degree in Education and received her       
  Ph. D. in Education, Leadership Policy, and Social Foundations.
  Dr. Tsegai joined SUNY Erie as the Dean of Engineering and 
Technologies in 2018 and then served as Associate Vice President for 
Academic Affairs for Health Sciences, Engineering, and Technologies. In 
2021, she was appointed as Provost and Vice President of Academic 
Affairs for the College. Dr. Tsegai served as the Colleges Officer-in-
Charge, and on December 5, 2023, was appointed the President of SUNY 
Erie.
  Today, we thank Dr. Adiam Tsegai for her commitment to higher 
education and serving the community. Please join me in congratulating 
.
I rise today to recognize the Battle Creek 
VA Medical Center for 100 years of service to our Nations veterans.
  Completed in 1924, the Battle Creek VA Medical Center was the 100th 
VA hospital in the United States. When it first opened, staff and 
patients from the hospital farmed about 200 acres of the 675-acre 
property. This activity served as therapy for the patients and allowed 
the hospital to be more self-sufficient.
  Today, the Battle Creek VA Medical Center has a wonderful campus that 
includes 30 buildings that are used for patient care and administrative 
offices. At its peak, the Medical Center had over 1,400 beds while 
today the focus is primarily on outpatient care.
  As the son of a disabled WWII veteran, who received care in Battle 
Creek, I have experienced firsthand the critical need for ensuring that 
the men and women who have served our Nation receive the respect and 
care they have earned.
, please join me in thanking the staff and care teams at 
the Battle Creek VA Medical Center who have prioritized caring for our 
veterans as well as our community for the past 100 years.
today I rise with my colleagues, 
Congressmen Ted Lieu and Mike Thompson to honor CC Yin as he celebrates 
his 88th birthday. Mr. Yin is a remarkable entrepreneur, community 
leader, and philanthropist whose impact is felt far and wide.
1960s with only $100 
in his pocket. He earned a mechanical engineering degree from the 
University of California, Berkeley, and later purchased a struggling 
McDonalds in Oakland, California. Together with his wife, he grew that 
single location into 30 successful franchises across Northern 
California. Their business achievements enabled them to focus on 
philanthropy and community leadership, particularly within the Asian 
American and Pacific Islander (AAPI) community.
  In 2001, Mr. Yin founded the Asian Pacific American Public Affairs 
(APAPA) organization, which promotes civic engagement, leadership, and 
education within the AAPI community. APAPAs mission has expanded 
nationwide, with multiple chapters across the United States. The 
organization provides scholarships and leadership training to empower 
the next generation of AAPI leaders.
His leadership has made a lasting difference, 
and our communities are stronger because of his contributions. We thank 
him for being a beacon of light in our community.
  On behalf of the constituents of Californias 4th, 8th, and 36th 
Congressional Districts, we wish Mr. Yin a very happy 88th birthday and

extend our sincere gratitude for his service to the community.
I am grateful for the opportunity to 
honor the exceptional accomplishments of Mr. Peter Jenks, who has 
recently been selected for the Top of Utah Military Affairs Committees 
Western Big Hat Award. This award--first given to Admiral Chester 
Nimitz--recognizes individuals who have demonstrated outstanding 
service to their community. Anyone who knows Peter knows that there is 
no one more deserving of this award than he.
  I know Peter best for his dedicated service to my constituents in 
Northern Utah, but his influence extends far beyond this narrow 
snapshot of his career. Peter has served Utahs First Congressional 
District for three decades, working as district director for three 
consecutive Members of Congress. In this role, he has been critical to 
the success of this office and Congressional District, especially in 
serving the needs of our servicemen and women at Hill Air Force Base.
  Beyond work, Peter is consistently generous with his time. He is a 
current board member and former president of the Utah Defense Alliance 
where he leads efforts to engage state and local government and 
military and business leaders on defense and aerospace issues. He also 
serves Wolf Creek Foundation board, serving and supporting the families 
of deployed military members.
  Peter has twice served as Honorary Commander at Hill Air Force Base, 
first with the 388th Fighter Wing and later with the 419th Fighter Wing 
and is universally loved by all who have worked with him. Those lucky 
enough to know him know there is no more loyal a friend nor selfless a 
mentor than Peter Jenks.
  It is my honor to recognize Peters accomplishment and service for 
Utahs First Congressional District and our Nations service members. 
Utah and the United States are better because of his work and example. 
I thank Peter for his service and sacrifice throughout the years. He is 
a model of courage, selfless service, and altruism from whom we can all 
learn.
I rise to honor Robert ``Bobby Pease, from 
Flemingsburg, Kentucky. Mr. Pease is an exemplary teacher at Fleming 
County High School.
a Bachelor of Science degree in Agricultural 
Education and a Master of Arts degree in Career and Technical 
Education. He began his teaching career at Fleming County High School 
in 2003 and is a national board-certified teacher. He is a welding 
instructor at Fleming County High School and Director of Education at 
the Kentucky Welding Institute. In 2023 and again in 2024, Mr. Pease 
coached welding teams from Fleming County High School who were named 
the Kentucky FFA State Fair Welding Champions. Mr. Pease was appointed 
as a Curriculum Specialist by the Accrediting Council for Continuing 
Education and Training. He is an AWS Certified Welding Inspector and is 
certified with OSHA, an NCCER Master Trainer, and an NCCCO Practical 
Examiner.
25 instructors nationwide to 
win the Harbor Freight Tools for Schools Prize for Teaching Excellence. 
This very prestigious and well-deserved award includes a $50,000 prize, 
to be shared with his schools skilled trades program. The award was 
created to recognize excellence among high school skilled trades 
teachers. More than 900 applications from all fifty states were 
submitted for the 2024 prize.
  In addition to all his professional honors. Mr. Pease serves as a 
mentor to his students and encourages them as he prepares them for good 
careers and a bright future. He is well-respected both at school and in 
the Flemingsburg community. I am honored to recognize him before the 
House of Representatives.
I rise today to honor the life and 
sacrifice of U.S. Marine Corps Captain Ronald W. Forrester. CAPT 
Forrester was reported missing in action during a combat mission during 
the Vietnam War. His remains were identified and accounted for on 
December 4, 2023, and he was buried with full military honors in 
Arlington National Cemetery on October 7, 2024. His answered call to 
service and dedication to our Nation left a legacy that has impacted 
multiple generations.
  CAPT Forrester was raised in Odessa, Texas and graduated from Texas 
A&amp;M University in 1969. At Texas A&amp;M University, he was a member of the 
Corps of Cadets before being commissioned as an officer into the Marine 
Corps.
  Within the Marine Corps, CAPT Forrester was a member of the Marine 
All-Weather Attack Squadron 533, Marine Air Group 15, 1st Marine Air 
Wing. On December 27, 1972, Forrester was assigned as the bombardier/
navigator aboard an A-6A Intruder along with the pilot, Captain Jim 
Chipman. During a nighttime combat mission over North Vietnam, radio 
contact with the aircraft was lost, and subsequent aerial search teams 
were unable to locate the missing plane or its crew. After several 
months, the Marine Corps changed the crews initial Missing In Action 
status to Killed In Action.
  On December 4, 2023, the Defense POW/MIA Accounting Agency (DPAA) 
identified the remains of Captain Ronald W. Forrester as well as those 
of his fellow crewmember, Captain Jim Chipman. CAPT Forrester was 
officially welcomed home in a moving memorial celebration held on 
February 2, 2024, at Lake Travis United Methodist Church and attended 
by hundreds of his family, friends, Texas A&amp;M classmates, and fellow 
veterans from across the country.
  At the time of his death, CAPT Forrester was 25 years old and married 
to Jana Bland Jenkins with a two-year-old daughter Karoni. She has 
dedicated much of her life to the POW/MIA cause, advocating for 
families who have dealt with the painful uncertainty surrounding their 
missing loved ones.
  The impact of CAPT Forresters life has influenced more than just 
those who knew him. His nephew, Craig Forrester, followed his path to 
Texas A&amp;M, the Corps of Cadets, and the Marine Corps. Craig Forrester 
credits his uncles memory and legacy with inspiring his own military 
service. Forresters granddaughter, Lilian Gonzales, believes she would 
not be the person she is without the love and support that has 
surrounded her because of her grandfathers absence and sacrifice.
  Captain Ronald W. Forrester lost his life in service to our Nation, 
and we are grateful that his family has been provided closure and 
allowed to bring him home to his fInal resting place.
I rise today to recognize the Citrus South 
Tule School on their 150-year anniversary and thank them for their 
significant contributions to the Porterville community. Citrus South 
Tule School, an elementary school located by Lake Success, opened its 
doors in 1874 as a one-room schoolhouse. For the first 140 years of its 
history, Citrus South Tule served the students in the immediate area of 
Lake Success. In 2015, the school became part of the Porterville 
Unified School District. Since its founding, Citrus South Tule has been 
committed to the academic success of all students. Today, the Citrus 
South Tule School offers a range of programs at the forefront of 
educational innovation. In 2017, the school opened its Future Ready and 
Qualcomm Thinkabit Labs, providing students with the opportunity to 
explore their interests in engineering, technology, and robotics. 
Through their range of STEM opportunities, the Citrus South Tule School 
helps students become innovative, collaborative, and hardworking 
members of the Porterville community. The Citrus South Tule School is a 
leader of educational innovation and attracts more than 2,500 visitors 
annually who come to explore their unique educational programs and 
scenic campus. Over the past century, Citrus South Tule has remained 
committed to their mission of ensuring all students have the education 
they need to thrive. It is because of the faculty and staff at Citrus 
South Tule School that students in the Central Valley community 
flourish, and I want to thank them all for creating a learning 
environment that helps our youth become the best they can be.
, I ask my colleagues in the United States House of 
Representatives to join me in celebrating Citrus South Tule School on 
their 150-year anniversary. Their work to enrich the lives of students 
in the Central Valley will be felt for generations to come.