Pro Tempore, today, I honor the unwavering 
dedication and remarkable milestones of State Senator Chris Connors 
throughout his career. His commitment to public service began with his 
election to the Lacey Township Committee in 1984, followed by his role 
as Mayor from 1986 to 1990. Senator Connors has also served as Director 
of the New Jersey Commission on Capital Budgeting and Planning, 
overseeing the states capital budget and expenditure plans. Elected to 
the General Assembly in 1989, Senator Connors has been a champion for 
his constituents. He was subsequently elected to the Senate in 2007, 
and his contributions have been recognized through various honors and 
awards.
  During my time as a state legislator, I had collaborated with Senator 
Chris Connors on several practical initiatives, such as establishing 
the Coastal New Jersey Evacuation Task Force to enhance the 
preparedness of coastal communities for natural disasters. 
Additionally, we fought diligently to secure South Jersey 
representation on the New Jersey Turnpike Authority, the governing body 
responsible for overseeing the Garden State Parkway.
  In addition to his political career, Senator Connors is an 
accomplished attorney, and he

remains a dedicated family man, married to his wife Deborah since 1979, 
and together they have two children. Senator Christopher J. Connors 
unwavering dedication, notable achievements, and commitment to serving 
his community make him a true role model. Let us express our utmost 
respect and appreciation for his remarkable public service. God Bless 
Senator Chris Connors, and God Bless our United States of America.
Pro Tempore, this April, I had the 
opportunity to attend Dylan Brancas Eagle Scout Court of Honor. Dylan 
joined the Boy Scouts in the fifth grade and shortly after achieved the 
Arrow of Light, the highest honor in Cub Scouts. Once he crossed over 
into the Boy Scouts, he hit the ground running with his troop, 
embarking on many adventures such as hiking Mount Washington and 
Tuckermans Ravine. One of his most memorable adventures was the 
twelve-day trip to Philmont Scout Reserve in New Mexico, where Dylan 
had the opportunity to serve as their ``Leave No Trace Guide. For 
Dylans Eagle Scout project, he planted lavender in the fields at 
Reeds farm in Egg Harbor Township. This lavender is now being used to 
produce different products such as soaps and oils while the fields are 
simultaneously serving as the location for community yoga classes. 
Dylan currently studies environmental science at Cedar Creek High 
School in the Magnet Program while simultaneously earning college 
credit.
  It was a pleasure to attend Dylans Eagle Scout Court of honor and he 
should be proud of his scouting achievements. God Bless Dylan, and God 
Bless our United States of America.
Pro Tempore, Iris Bathsheba Rueda Martinez, a 
Mexican attorney, graduated from Universidad del Tepeyac, Mexico City, 
stands as a prominent figure within the Central Florida Hispanic 
community. Her illustrious career spans a remarkable 17-year tenure of 
service at the Consulates of Mexico in Orlando, Florida, and Fresno, 
California. Iris has dedicated her life to providing unwavering support 
and making a profound impact on the lives of her fellow Mexican 
compatriots living abroad while working closely with community 
organizations, legal experts, and government officials to address the 
unique needs of Mexican nationals living in the United States.
  Born in the vibrant heart of Mexico City, Iris has ardently 
maintained a deep connection to her Hispanic cultural heritage 
throughout her life journey. Her commitment to the promotion and 
celebration of Hispanic heritage resonates in every facet of her 
existence, with deep gratitude for the guiding influence of her faith 
in God. Throughout her distinguished consular career, Iris played a 
determinate and indispensable role in delivering humanitarian, 
community, and legal assistance to Mexican citizens residing in Florida 
and California. She participated in projects that led to the protection 
of human rights of hundreds of Mexican countrymen believing always in 
the success of mutual international relations based on the power of 
diplomacy.
  Beyond her consular duties and advocacy work, Iris takes immense 
pride in her roles as a devoted wife and mother to a cherished 
daughter. The bedrock of family values holds central importance in her 
life, with her family in Mexico serving as an unwavering pillar of 
support. One of Iriss deepest aspirations is to instill in her 
daughter an enduring love for her Mexican heritage and a profound sense 
of pride in her American birthright.
  Currently, Iris lends her expertise and dedication to a distinguished 
international consultancy firm Lord and Lord Consulting, led by 
accomplished women. She plays a key role in the management of the 
relations between LATAM, the USA, and the communication with the U.S. 
federal government.
  The selection of Iris as an honoree during Hispanic Heritage Month is 
a well-deserved recognition of her dedication and contribution to the 
promotion of the Hispanic community in the United States.
Pro Tempore, I rise today to recognize the 
contributions of Rhonda Rochon Smith as she is honored as one of 
Californias 8th Congressional Districts Women of the Year.
  Described as passionate, charismatic, compassionate, and driven by 
her colleagues and fellow community members, Rhonda is a dedicated 
community servant involved with numerous non-profits, committees and 
advocacy groups throughout our district. As the Program Manager at the 
Center for Volunteer &amp; Non-Profit Leadership, Rhonda facilitates the 
advancement of nonprofits and volunteerism by strengthening leadership, 
encouraging innovation, and empowering individuals in Solano County. 
She is also the Volunteer Services Manager for Contra Costa Regional 
Medical Center where she plays an integral role in placing volunteers 
in the hospital to enhance the quality of patient care. Outside of 
these roles, Rhonda serves on the Board of Directors of the Solano 
County Fair Association, Vallejo Police Oversight and Accountability 
Commission, and is Vice-Chair of the Contra Costa Regional Health 
Foundation. She is also an active member of the Delta Sigma Theta 
Sorority, the Vallejo NAACP, and Black Women Organized for Political 
Action. Rhonda works every day to serve her community and inspires 
others with her commitment to making positive change wherever she goes.
  On behalf of the people of Californias 8th Congressional District, 
it is my pleasure to honor and recognize Rhonda Rochon Smith for her 
positive contributions to our community.
Pro Tempore, I rise today to recognize the 
contributions of Ruthie Dineen as she is honored as one of Californias 
8th Congressional Districts Women of the Year.
  Ruthie is a compassionate and dedicated leader who works to improve 
her community through her work, talent, and volunteerism. She is a 
Licensed Clinical Social Worker as well as an accomplished pianist and 
composer. Ruthie is the current executive director of the East Bay 
Center for the Performing Arts where she has led the organization with 
strategic vision since 2021. Colleagues describe her as a dedicated and 
passionate leader who has touched the lives of countless students and 
staff. Since taking the position, Ruthie has helped increase the 
funding for the East Bay Center from $3.2M to $4.2M and in doing so has 
helped raise wages for the Centers staff. Ruthie is also leading the 
Centers Strategic Plan, requiring organizational and cultural changes 
to the operation, doing so while maintaining high faculty and staff 
morale. Her work makes the school a more vibrant place for every 
student and helps many discover new talents and interests which may 
otherwise go unnoticed. Ruthie embodies the mission of the East Bay 
Center of the Performing Arts to engage with students in the community 
through the world of performance traditions.
  She is also an active member of her community who has been involved 
in a number of initiatives including Healthy Richmond, the Invest in 
Youth Coalition, and the planning group for the Blueprint to Prevent 
Interpersonal Violence in Contra Costa County. In everything she does, 
Ruthie finds ways to bring positive change to her community.
  On behalf of the people of Californias 8th Congressional District, 
it is my pleasure to honor and recognize Ruthie Dineen for her positive 
contributions to our community.
Pro Tempore, Yaritza Perel graduated from 
Gateway High School in Kissimmee in May of 1999. In September of that 
year, she arrived on the world-famous yellow footprints of the Marine 
Corps recruit depot in Parris Island, South Carolina, graduating in 
December. After graduation, she was assigned to Fort Lee, Virginia for 
MOS training as a bulk fuel specialist. Upon graduation, she was sent 
to her first duty station at Camp Pendleton, California, and assigned 
to the First Marine Division, First Marine Expeditionary Force, Seventh 
Engineer Support Battalion, Bulk Fuel Company.
  After the attacks on September 11, 2001, the Marine Corps shifted 
gears and began preparing for deployment to the Middle East in support 
of Operation Iraqi Freedom. As part of the initial invasion, Bulk Fuel 
Company was attached to the Sixth Engineers Support Battalion. Six days 
into the war, Bulk Fuel Company completed the 57-mile hose reel 
tactical fuel system, capable of pumping fuel from the Kuwait-Iraq 
border to Logistics Support Area Viper. Setting up these fuel lines was 
crucial to providing all forward-moving units the capabilities to 
complete their mission and reach their targets. These efforts earned 
Yaritzas unit a Presidential Unit Citation.
  On her second enlistment, Yaritza was assigned to COMUSMARCENT at 
MacDill Air Force Base in Tampa, Florida, where she served in an 
administrative role working in the G-1 and G-3 overseeing manpower 
operations and casualty accountability for all forward operating 
commands. Upon completing those orders, she was sent back to the Marine 
Corps Air Station in Miramar, H&amp;HS Squadron serving as Flight Line NCO 
conducting flight operations and fuel testing for all base operations.
  Yaritza separated from the Marine Corps in 2013 and moved back to 
Orlando to be close to family. Since her return, Yaritza has been an 
active member of the community, learning to repurpose her service to 
the great state of Florida. Yaritza served as a platoon leader with The 
Mission Continues for over three years and completed over 50 community 
service projects in the Central Florida area. After Hurricane Maria, 
she went with The Mission Continues to Puerto Rico to help restore the 
El Morro National Monument. During her time volunteering, she found 
Moms Clean Air Force, a national nonprofit organization focused on 
cleaning the contaminated air across the state. As the state organizer 
for Florida, she has met with congressional leaders, legislators, and 
community leaders to make and change laws and regulations to ensure a 
cleaner healthier environment for future generations. As an 
environmental advocate, she was the voice for the voiceless and spoke 
on behalf of Floridians.
  Currently, she works as an outreach specialist with the Wounded 
Warrior Project. In this role, she engages with veterans and their 
families to bring them out of the house and get them engaged with each 
other, our communities, and other resources that could aid them in 
their healing journey. Yaritza is responsible for empowering and 
inspiring post-9/11 veterans in Florida to re-establish themselves as 
positive contributors to their communities. She is also a proud mom.
Pro Tempore, last month, I had the honor of 
attending Ian McKinneys Eagle Scout Court of Honor. Ian began his 
scouting experience as a Tiger Cub and after many years and 
transformative experiences, has now earned the rank of Eagle Scout. 
Throughout the years, Ian has gained valuable knowledge and useful 
skills, made possible by his participation in the merit badge program 
and his steady involvement with the troop. To achieve the rank of Eagle 
Scout, Ian developed and built a community educational garden to enrich 
his schools STEM program, leaving a lasting impact on fellow and 
future classmates.
  Ians dedication to the Scouts has been admirable and he should be 
proud of all that he has achieved with them. God Bless Ian McKinney and 
God Bless the United States of America.
Pro Tempore, I rise today to thank 
Corporal Scott Gilley for his service with the Euless Police Department 
and to congratulate him on his retirement. Corporal Gilley has spent 28 
years as an officer with Euless PD protecting his community and 
countless North Texans. Id like to extend my sincere appreciation for 
his selfless service.
  Before pursuing his aspirations to become a police officer, Scott 
served in the United States Coast Guard for 8 years. After attaining an 
Honorable Discharge, he was hired as a Euless Police Officer in 1995. 
His primary assignment with the department was working as a senior 
member in the patrol division. Scotts leadership and work has had a 
significant impact leading many of his fellow officers on to very 
successful careers due to his mentorship. Over his many years of 
service, Scott has received four police certifications, his Corporal 
rank, and a variety of police in-service training. Hes used this 
knowledge to provide countless hours of police training to other 
officers and mentor new ones straight from the academy.
  During his time with Euless PD, Scott has received 40 police 
commendations in which he was commended for his service and 
professionalism to the department and community. It has always been my 
view that public service is among the most admirable of callings, one 
that demands the very best among us to tackle monumental challenges in 
the name of selfless service to others. Corporal Gilley has always been 
known and appreciated as an ``informal leader of the troops and one 
that can be counted on in any situation. The courage and dedication he 
displayed during his many years of service in both the United States 
Military and Euless Police Department is admirable, and Texas-24 is 
better for having the benefit of leadership.
  It is my honor to congratulate Corporal Scott Gilley on his 
successful career and retirement.
Pro Tempore, I rise today to recognize 
Marie Handy of Lakewood, Colorado for receiving the United States 
Department of State Benjamin A. Gilman International Scholarship. As 
part of this prestigious honor, Marie traveled to Japan to study 
abroad.
  U.S. Study Abroad programs are an important component of the federal 
governments efforts to ensure Americans of all backgrounds have the 
opportunity to gain global experiences and work across our borders to 
help address our worlds greatest challenges. The Benjamin A. Gilman 
Scholarship provides exceptional undergraduate students with the 
opportunity to expand their cultural proficiencies, study critical need 
languages, and conduct STEM research. The scholarship has empowered 
over 41,000 individuals with financial need to engage in people-to-
people diplomacy and prepare for distinguished careers in public 
service.
  I commend Marie for pursuing an exemplary international education and 
representing America abroad as a citizen ambassador. This scholarship 
rightly recognizes a commitment to academic excellence. Mr. Speaker Pro 
Tempore, it is a privilege to recognize Maries many accomplishments.
Pro Tempore, today I recognize the 
distinguished career of Retired U.S. Army Colonel and President 
Emeritus of Lackawanna College Mark Volk, a true hero of Northeast 
Pennsylvania, who has dedicated over four decades of his life to 
selfless service. While Colonel Volks military career is marked with 
honor and valor, it is his profound contributions to Lackawanna College 
that I wish to recognize upon his well-deserved retirement.
  Colonel Volks military journey spans 26 years, a testament to his 
unwavering commitment to duty and service. His military career included 
13 years in Field Artillery and an additional 13 years in Military 
Intelligence. During this time, Colonel Volk held various staff and 
command positions, both in the United States and Germany, gaining 
expertise and honing his leadership skills.
  While serving as the Chief of the Strategic Leadership Division in 
the Army Strategy, Plans and Policy Directorate (G3) at the Pentagon, 
his office was in the wing impacted by the plane during the tragic 
events of September 11, 2001. For his heroic efforts and life-saving 
actions immediately following the attack on the Pentagon, he was 
awarded the Soldiers Medal, the Armys highest non-combat award for 
heroism. Additional military awards earned by Colonel Volk include the 
Legion of Merit, the Meritorious Service Medal with 5 Oak Leaf 
Clusters, the Army Commendation Medal with 4 Oak Leaf Clusters, the 
Army Achievement Medal, the National Defense Service Medal, the Armed 
Forces Expeditionary Medal, the Armed Forces Service Medal and the NATO 
Medal.
  Upon his retirement from the military on January 1, 2004, Colonel 
Volk returned to NEPA and embarked on another chapter of service, this 
time in the field of education at Lackawanna College. Over the course 
of 16 remarkable years his tenure was distinguished by remarkable 
achievements, serving as the executive vice president from 2006 to 2012 
and vice president for operations and plans from 2005 to 2006 prior to 
taking over as president in July 2012 until his retirement in 2020. 
Under his leadership, the college introduced online courses and 
degrees, offered baccalaureate degrees, established a nursing program 
and expanded with new extension centers. It is a testament to his 
dedication and leadership that the college was ranked as the fastest-
growing private college or university, with enrollments of 500 or more 
students during his presidency.
  Perhaps his most enduring legacy is his belief in the potential of 
individuals from all walks of life. In his eyes, greatness is not 
reserved for the few: He firmly believes that everyone has the capacity 
to be a force for positive change in a world that yearns for it. His 
optimism is contagious, and his unwavering faith in the region, 
families, and students of NEPA hag left an indelible mark.

  Colonel Mark Volk, and his wife Lynn, continue to be active and 
generous members of our community, giving their time and energy to 
numerous organizations. Their dedication to service has set a shining 
example for us all. I commend Colonel Volk for his unwavering 
commitment to our community and our Nation; he truly represents the 
very best of Pennsylvanias 8th Congressional District.