I rise today to recognize the Adams Fire 
Companys 100-

year anniversary. For a century, the Adams Fire Company has served the 
Town of Wheatfield and Niagara County, providing lifesaving fire 
protection and EMS services to our community.
  In 1924, thirty residents of the Town of Wheatfield came together at 
the District 3 Schoolhouse with a goal to establish a fire department 
in Nashville, NY. Charter members George Tollner, Walter Tollner, 
William Adams, William Gombert, Albert Beutel, and Benjamin Tollner saw 
the pressing need for a fire department in their town after their 
friend Fred Zastrows barn burned to the ground.
  The building of the Adams Fire Company was a true community effort. 
William Adams, the fire companys namesake, donated a lot on Niagara 
Falls Boulevard for the new station; the original building still stands 
today. The 30 founding members built the fire station, with material 
donated from local lumber yards and monetary donations collected from 
the community fund they established.
  Further, the Adams Fire Company has been a cornerstone of the Niagara 
County community, hosting numerous events for residents. From field 
days and dances to pie sales and bingo night fundraisers, the Adams 
Fire Company has shown its unwavering dedication to serving our 
community.
  In 2023, the Adams Fire Company ran 754 calls, 586 Emergency Medical 
Service calls, and provided mutual aid 46 times. Under the steadfast 
leadership of Fire Chief Donald Lauer, the Adams Fire Company has 
continued to keep the Town of Wheatfield and Niagara County communities 
safe and protected.
  Please join me in congratulating the Adams Fire Company on their 
100th anniversary and thanking them for their incredible service to the 
Western New York community.
CHRIS POA NAMED OHIOS 13TH DISTRICT CHAMPION OF THE WEEK
today, I rise to recognize Chris Poa of 
Hudson as Ohio 13s Champion of the Week.
  Chris has been a Hudson U.S. Postal worker for 29 years, and 
recently, his awareness and quick-thinking helped save the life of an 
elderly woman.
  Chris was on his delivery route when he noticed one of the residents 
he delivers to, a 91-year-old woman, had not picked up her mail in a 
few days.
  Chris often chatted with the resident, and his concern prompted him 
to call in a wellness check for her.
  When EMS arrived, they found that the older woman had fallen in her 
home and was unable to get up.
  Thanks to Chriss attentiveness, EMS was able to take the woman to 
the hospital for treatment.
  Chris was awarded the Hudson EMS Life Saving Award for his actions.
  And his selflessness and compassion is a shining example of the 
spirit that makes our district the Birthplace of Champions--a place 
where neighbors care for each other and look out for one another.
  I thank Chris Poa for his continued dedication to serving our 
community.
I rise today to congratulate Dr. 
Sara ``Mandy Reece on her appointment as Interim dean of the School 
of Pharmacy at the Philadelphia College of Osteopathic Medicine, known 
as PCOM.
  Dr. Reece has been a part of the Georgia PCOM community since 2010, 
having served as the Vice Chair of the Department of Pharmacy Practice 
and Director of Interprofessional Education.
  Before Joining the PCOM community, Dr. Reece served as a pharmacy 
director and diabetes educator at District 2 Public Health in 
Gainesville, Georgia.

  Dr. Reeces appointment as interim dean is only one of her many 
accomplishments, among being named the PCOM School of Pharmacy Teacher 
of the Year for Pharmacy Practice in 2019 and Faculty Preceptor of the 
Year in 2022 and 2023.
  In Dr. Reeces new role as interim dean, she will continue to advance 
the great mission of PCOMs School of Pharmacy throughout the state of 
Georgia.
  I sincerely congratulate Dr. Reece on her accomplishments and share 
this excitement with the Georgia PCOM community.
I rise today to acknowledge and honor a 
distinguished member of my community, Lillian McClain, who is turning 
100 years old next month. Born on September 5, 1924, in Charlotte, 
North Carolina, Mrs. McClain spent much of her childhood in Clifton 
Forge, Virginia. Following her graduation from Clifton Forge High 
School, she attended Longwood College (now Longwood University) in 
Farmville, Virginia, for one year. She left Longwood to contribute to 
the World War II effort, taking a position with the Army at Fort 
Bellwood and volunteering at USO clubs in Richmond, Virginia. During 
her time at Fort Bellwood, she met and later married John R. McClain, 
Sr., on April 11, 1945.
  After the war, Mrs. McClain and John resided briefly in Washington, 
D.C., where their first son, John, was born. They soon moved to 
Lynchburg, Virginia, where their other sons, David and Mark, were 
welcomed into the family.
  Throughout her career, Mrs. McClain primarily worked as a bank 
teller. Her unwavering dedication to her community extended far beyond 
her career. She has been an active member of the Methodist Church 
throughout her life and has engaged in numerous activities, including 
volunteering at her sons events, participating in community theater, 
and singing with the Sweet Adelines.
a witness to significant historical events and 
has gained great knowledge to share with future generations.
  Currently, Mrs. McClain resides in New Bern, North Carolina, with her 
son John and his wife, Dixie. It is with great respect and admiration 
that I lead my colleagues in recognizing Mrs. McClain for her 
extraordinary contributions and the remarkable life she has led in 
service to our Great Nation. I wish Mrs. McClain a very Happy Birthday.
I rise today to mourn the death 
of the Honorable Sheila Mobley McNeill who recently passed away at 81 
years old in the city where she was born, Brunswick, GA.
  Sheila served as Navy Leagues 42nd national president from 2003 to 
2005. She was the first and only female president in the organizations 
121-year history.
  Additionally, she spent 58 years with the Navy League where she held 
many distinguished positions before becoming its president.
  She earned many awards for her service, including the Secretary of 
the Navys Distinguished, Superior and Meritorious Public Service 
medals, the United States Coast Guards Distinguished and Meritorious 
Public Service medals, and many more.
  She also served as a Georgia state senator representing district 3 
from January 2021 to January 2023. She was a devoted wife to Arlie 
McNeill, a Navy veteran who passed in 2023, and is remembered as a 
loving mother and grandmother.
I rise today to honor Kern Energy on its 
remarkable 90 years of service as a vital family-owned and operated 
transportation fuel producer in the Southern San Joaquin Valley. Since 
its founding in 1934, Kern Energy has exemplified a resilient ``small 
but mighty ethos, continuously evolving to meet Californias dynamic 
energy needs. As the sole refinery producing gasoline and diesel 
between Los Angeles and the Bay Area, Kern Energy plays a crucial role 
in fueling both our states agricultural heartland and its major 
transportation networks. Today, they proudly contribute 1 percent of 
Californias gasoline and 3 percent of its diesel supply.
  Refining up to 27,000 barrels per day of crude oil and producing a 
wide range of ``California Clean renewable products, Kern Energys 
team of 185 continues to proudly meet the transportation needs of the 
Central Valley and the state. Kern Energy takes a pragmatic approach to 
producing the clean energy California needs now and in the future. With 
a focus on driving down the carbon intensity of gasoline and diesel, 
reducing the environmental footprint of their facility, and innovating 
toward next-generation renewable fuels, their mission is both essential 
and commendable.
  Throughout its history, Kern Energy has not only adapted to 
Californias rigorous regulatory landscape but has thrived as an 
innovator in renewable fuel production. A powerhouse for innovation, 
they were among the first in the Nation to produce renewable diesel 
through bio-feed co-processing and the first small refinery in our 
state to blend biodiesel, aligning with Californias Low Carbon Fuel 
Standard and the Federal Renewable Fuel Standard. Their efforts have 
resulted in over 58 million gallons of renewable diesel and 74 million 
gallons of biodiesel blended into their fuels.
  Beyond their contributions to clean energy, Kern Energy has been a 
steadfast community partner, committed to both economic growth and 
environmental stewardship. Over the years, Kern Energy has demonstrated 
a strong commitment to their workforce and the communities they serve, 
ensuring that their operations contribute positively to our regions 
prosperity.
  As we celebrate Kern Energys 90th anniversary, I commend them for 
their leadership in energy innovation and their dedication to 
preserving our communitys quality of life. Heres to another 90 years 
of excellence, job creation and sustainable solutions as Kern Energy 
continues to pave the way for a cleaner, brighter future for 
California.
, I invite my esteemed colleagues to join me in honoring 
Kern Energy. Let us celebrate their legacy and their ongoing commitment 
to advancing Californias climate goals.
LORNA KEARNEY NAMED OHIOS 13TH DISTRICT CHAMPION OF THE WEEK
today, I recognize Lorna Kearney of Akron as 
Ohio 13s Champion of the Week.
  Lorna recently made history at 66 years old when she became the 
oldest player to play in the American Womens Football League for her 
team, the Detroit Prowl.
  Lorna has always had a love for sports, and her passion for football 
led to her interest in joining the American Womens Football League.
  Unfortunately, the year she was supposed to start playing, she was 
diagnosed with breast cancer.
  However, Lorna fought hard and won her battle with cancer, and this 
year, she played her first game.
  Lornas dedication is an inspiration, not just to her family and 
teammates, but to everyone in our community.
  Lornas dedication to tackle adversity on and off the field is a 
shining example of the spirit that makes Ohios 13th Congressional 
District the Birthplace of Champions.
  I congratulate Lorna Kearney, for making history and demonstrating 
its never too late to do the things you love.
I rise today to recognize David Lucas for 
winning the 2024 Paul Kroegel Refuge Manager of the Year award from the 
National Wildlife Refuge Association.
  The Paul Kroegel Award honors refuge managers who have made 
significant contributions to the protection and management of national 
wildlife refuges. During his time as a manager for the Rocky Flats, Two 
Ponds, and Rocky Mountain Arsenal National Wildlife Refuges, David 
rehabilitated two formerly hazardous waste sites into thriving animal 
refuges, oversaw the restoration of 15,000 acres of prairie habitat, 
and reintroduced the Black-Footed Ferret to one of his refuges. He also 
expanded access to his refuges by installing ADA accessible e trails 
and piers and hiring bilingual rangers. Davids work brought Colorados 
public lands closer to home, ensuring that everyone can learn from and 
enjoy our diverse environment.
  On behalf of the people of Colorados Seventh Congressional district, 
it is my honor to congratulate David Lucas on receiving the Refuge 
Manager of the Year award and thank him for his remarkable work in 
conserving Colorados public lands.
I rise today to recognize European 
Gourmet of Arvada, Colorado for receiving the Arvada Economic 
Development Associations 2024 Outstanding Retailer Award. Each year, 
this award honors an Arvada business that demonstrates an exceptional 
contribution to the local economy and commitment to excellence in 
service.
  Since the Bien family founded the business in 1999, they have worked 
hard to offer a wide variety of traditional Polish and Eastern European 
treats, such as their sausages, hams, cheeses, bread, pierogies, and 
sweets. Today, European Gourmet has earned the reputation as a top 
destination for Polish and Eastern European cuisine in Colorado, with 
people from around the state traveling to Arvada to experience their 
authentic foods and great service.
  On behalf of the people of Colorados Seventh Congressional District, 
it is my honor to congratulate European Gourmet on receiving the 
Outstanding Retailer Award and for their contributions to the Arvada 
community.
I rise today to recognize Henriksen 
Amplifiers of Arvada, Colorado for receiving the Arvada Economic 
Development Associations 2024 Lloyd J. King Entrepreneurial Spirit 
Award. Each year, this award recognizes an Arvada company that 
demonstrates excellence in entrepreneurial spirit, creative business 
practices, and economic innovation.
  Bud Henriksen founded Henriksen Amplifiers in 2006 with his son Peter 
when a newly acquired jazz guitar led him to make his own amp. Since 
Buds passing in 2009, Peter Henriksen has carried on his fathers 
legacy while expanding further into other genres of music. Henriksens 
contributions to Arvada extend beyond amplifiers: the business has been 
committed to investing their time, expertise, and money in local 
concerts, artists, and community events, such as the annual Rocky 
Mountain Archtop Guitar Festival in Olde Town Arvada. Henriksen 
Amplifiers sets a clear example of how a business can bring more to a 
community than just their product.
  On behalf of the people of Colorados Seventh Congressional District, 
it is my honor to congratulate Henriksen Amplifiers for receiving the 
Lloyd J. King Entrepreneurial Spirit Award and for their contributions 
to the Arvada community.
I rise today to recognize Lindsey Horan 
of Golden, Colorado for representing the United States in Womens 
Soccer at the 2024 Paris Olympic Games.
  Lindsey is a world-class athlete, having won three championship 
titles since she began her professional career in 2012. She played a 
vital role in the United States Womens National Soccer Team (USWNT) 
winning the Womens 2019 World Cup and earning the bronze medal during 
the 2020 Tokyo Olympics. She returned to the international field as 
captain of the team during the 2023 World Cup, where she led the team 
to the knockout stage of the tournament. Lindsey, along with the rest 
of the USWNT, has also worked hard to champion equal pay between the 
mens and womens national soccer teams. She is a remarkable athlete, 
and her valuable contributions during the 2024 Paris Olympic Games 
helped the United States bring home an Olympic gold medal.
  On behalf of the people of Colorados Seventh Congressional district, 
it is my honor to congratulate Lindsey Horan for representing Colorado 
and the United States during the 2024 Paris Olympic Games.
I rise today to honor the life of Mrs. 
Maria Rodriguez Mena, who passed away on July 1, 2024. Maria Rodriguez 
Mena was born in Aquila, Michoacan, on December 27, 1958, to Maria and 
Severo Rodriguez. At the age of 15, she moved to the United States with 
her parents and siblings, where they settled in Visalia. She later 
graduated from the College of the Sequoias. Mrs. Mena began her career 
in broadcasting at KQIQ radio station, initially working in promotions. 
She later hosted her own show, ``Mujer a Mujer, where she offered 
advice on relationships to her listeners. In 1986, Mrs. Mena married 
Patricio Mena, a local realtor and owner of Studio 45. After her time 
at KQIQ, she transitioned into real estate herself, becoming a well-
known and respected realtor within the Latino community. Throughout her 
career, she was passionate about helping families find their ideal 
homes. In 2007, she and her husband remodeled Studio 45 and opened 
Giovannis Pizzeria and Arcade. Mrs. Mena was deeply committed to 
helping improve the lives of others in the Porterville community. She 
was an active participant in Encuentro Matrimonial, helping couples to 
resolve their issues. She also served as president of both the Exchange 
Club and the Southeastern Tulare County Republican Women. She graduated 
from Leadership Porterville and was a member of the Zonta Club of 
Porterville. Mrs. Mena was a dedicated parishioner at Holy Cross 
Church. In her free time, she enjoyed spending time with her family and 
playing golf with friends. Mrs. Mena will be remembered for her 
kindness, empathy, and passion for the well-being of the Porterville 
community. She is survived by her husband Patricio and their three 
children, Pierre, Bonita and Giovanni.
, I ask all my colleagues in the House of Representatives 
to join me in honoring the incredible life of Mrs. Maria Rodriguez 
Mena. Her dedication to the Porterville community will be felt for 
generations to come.