Object.
The Deputy Speaker interrupted the business ( Standing Order No. 11(2) ).
Bill to be further considered on  Friday 20 June .
I rise to speak in favour of new clause 15, which clarifies that an assisted death would not be classified as an unnatural death and that a full coroner’s inquest would not normally be required.
My constituent Antony Shackleton lived with motor neurone disease for six long years. As his condition worsened, his options narrowed until there was only one choice that preserved his dignity, autonomy and peace: to travel to Dignitas in Switzerland and end his suffering on his own terms. Louise, as his wife of 25 years, and someone who had known him since the age of 18, did what any loving partner would do: she stood by him. She helped him on to that plane and held his hand through the most difficult decision of their lives, and now, for that act of love, she is under police investigation.
That is precisely why we need new clause 15. If the Bill is passed, assisted dying would be a legal, strictly regulated and monitored choice made by the individual concerned.
I rise to support a number of new clauses and amendments to the Bill. The common thread running through all of them is a need to address some of the gaps in the safeguards and oversight. Should the Bill pass, I at least want to ensure that we improve its protections and remove some of the risks that it contains.
New clause 4 requires the chief medical officer to monitor the operation of the legislation, rather than depending solely on the assisted dying commissioner. Alongside the requirement for a High Court judge, oversight by the CMO was removed during the Committee stage. This means that, essentially, the assisted dying commissioner would mark their own homework. New clause 4 returns the safeguard of independent oversight, which is sensible given the significant concerns expressed by many experts and organisations, which were often neutral on the principle, but concerned about the Bill. They include the Royal College of Psychiatrists, the Association for Palliative Medicine, the British Geriatrics Society, the Royal College of Physicians and many experts such as Professor James Monckton Smith, a leading criminologist, Baroness Finlay, Parliament’s leading expert on palliative care, Sir David Haslam, former head of the British Medical Association and of the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence—my previous employer—and many more. All have expressed concerns, even when neutral on the principle of the adequacy of the Bill.
Hence new clause 4 requires an annual report to include
“information about the application of the Act in relation to—
persons who have protected characteristics, and
any other description of persons specified in regulations made by the Secretary of State.”
I fervently hope that that includes domestic violence victims.
Amendment 13 very sensibly adds the requirement that the commissioner appointment is not the sole remit of the Prime Minister at the time, by requiring the consent of the Health and Social Care Committee. This provides a safeguard against ideological and politically motivated appointments, and I would be very critical of anyone who would want to prevent that.
Amendment 15 addresses the significant concerns about the involvement of private—for profit—providers of assisted dying. There are concerns that, when there is a commercial relationship between providers, there will be a gaming of the system. That risks compromising the relationship between the co-ordinating doctor and the independent doctor. Likewise, the existence of such providers does not allay concerns about doctor shopping, as was raised in the previous debate. Hence amendment 15 will require private providers to be transparent and provide reports on service members, service numbers, costs and revenue.
In previous debates and in the public discourse I have found it very disconcerting that, in response to legitimate concerns, all that we have been offered—as we have seen today—are some promised, unspecified future regulations that will fix the gap—[Hon. Members: “Hear, hear!”]
I beg to move, That the House sit in private.
Question put forthwith ( Standing Order No. 163 ) and negatived.
Before we begin today’s proceedings,  I know that the whole House will have been horrified to hear the news of yesterday’s crash of an Air India flight from Gujarat to London. On behalf of the House, I express our deep sorrow at this awful tragedy. Many colleagues will have lost constituents and they will be working tirelessly to support those families who have suffered a devasting loss. Our thoughts are with those constituents, their friends and the victims in India, the United Kingdom and around the world. I am expecting Ministers to come to the House on Monday to make a statement and provide an update on the Air India crash, as well as about the events that have happened overnight in the middle east.
Further consideration of Bill, as amended in the Public Bill Committee.
Before we begin, I would like to say a few words about today’s proceedings.
We will begin at the point we ended on  Friday 16 May , with the decisions to be taken after debate on the first group of amendments. I will put the necessary questions without further debate. After that, debate on the second group of new clauses and amendments can begin. I remind hon. Members that the scope of that debate will be the amendments and new clauses in that group.
Nearly 60 Members have indicated that they wish to speak in the debate. Not all hon. Members will be called. It is not customary to impose a time limit on speeches on a private Member’s Bill, but I hope that Member in charge of the Bill, and the speakers after her, will restrict themselves in the early part of the debate, including in taking interventions. The Chair will keep time limits under review as the debate progresses. If the Chair feels that people are taking advantage of the Chamber, a time limit will be imposed, but I hope we do not have to do that. I do not expect to call the Front Benchers to speak until at least 1.15 pm.
I can also confirm that I have provisionally selected for separate decision all of the propositions in the name of Kim Leadbeater, the Member in Charge of the Bill. I have also provisionally selected the following for separate decision on new clauses: amendment (b) to new clause 14, new clause 1, new clause 2 and new clause 16. I will make further announcements on selection for separate  decision on amendments at an appropriate point. We will begin with the question that new clause 10 will be added to the Bill, which was debated on  Friday 16 May .
“(1) No person is under any duty to participate in the provision of assistance in accordance with this Act.
(2) No registered medical practitioner is under any duty to become—
(a) the coordinating doctor in relation to any person, or
(b) the independent doctor in relation to any person.
(3) No registered medical practitioner, other than the coordinating doctor or the independent doctor, is under any duty to perform any function under or in connection with this Act other than—
(a) a function relating to the giving of notifications, or
(b) a function relating to the recording of matters in a person’s medical records.
(4) No health professional or social care professional is under any duty to respond when consulted under section 11(3)(b) (requirement for assessing doctor to consult professional with relevant qualifications or experience).
(5) No registered pharmacist or registered pharmacy technician is under any duty to participate in the supply of an approved substance to a registered medical practitioner for use in accordance with section 23.
(6) No person is under any duty to—
(a) act as a witness under this Act, or
(b) act as a proxy under this Act.
(7) Nothing in this section affects—
(a) any duty relating to the giving of notifications under this Act or the recording of matters in a person’s medical records,
(b) any duty relating to a requirement to keep records or to provide information, or
(c) any duty of a professional to respond to enquiries made under section 11(2)(b) (enquiries by assessing doctor) relating to health or social care the professional is providing, or has recently provided, to a person seeking assistance under this Act.
(8) Schedule (Protection from detriment) amends the Employment Rights Act 1996 to make provision to protect employees and other workers from being subjected to any detriment for—
(a) exercising (or proposing to exercise) a right under this section not to participate in an activity or perform a function, or
(b) participating in the provision of assistance in accordance with this Act or performing any other function under this Act.
(9) In this section—
(a) a reference to a duty includes any duty, whether arising from any contract, statute or otherwise;
(b) “registered pharmacist” and “registered pharmacy technician” have the same meaning as in the Pharmacy Order 2010 (S.I. 2010/231) (see article 3 of that Order).”—(Kim Leadbeater.)
This new clause, intended to replace clause 28, expands the protection currently provided by that clause by broadening the persons to whom it applies and the functions to which it relates; and it introduces NS1 which makes provision for enforcement of the right not be subject to detriment in connection with the Bill
Question put, That the clause be added to the Bill.
Question agreed to.
New clause 10 accordingly added to the Bill.
“(1) This section applies where—
(a) after a first declaration has been witnessed by the coordinating doctor, that doctor is unable or unwilling to continue to carry out the functions of the coordinating doctor, or
(b) after a referral is made under section 9(3)(c) (including a referral to which section 12(4) applies), but before a report under section 10 has been made by virtue of that referral, the independent doctor is unable or unwilling to continue to carry out the functions of the independent doctor,
and in this section such a coordinating or independent doctor is referred to as “the outgoing doctor”.
(2) The outgoing doctor must as soon as practicable give written notice of their inability or unwillingness to continue to carry out their functions under this Act to—
(a) the person seeking assistance,
(b) the Commissioner, and
(c) if the outgoing doctor is the independent doctor, the coordinating doctor.
(3) Any duty or power of the outgoing doctor under this Act that arose in consequence of the declaration or referral mentioned in subsection (1) ceases to have effect from the time the outgoing doctor complies with subsection (2); but this does not apply to any duty under subsection (8) or (9).
(4) The Secretary of State may by regulations make provision relating to the appointment, with the agreement of the person seeking assistance, of a replacement coordinating doctor who meets the requirements of section 7(5) and who is able and willing to carry out the functions of the coordinating doctor.
(5) Regulations under subsection (4) may, in particular, make provision to ensure continuity of care for the person seeking assistance despite the change in the coordinating doctor.
(6) Where the independent doctor gives a notice under subsection (2)—
(a) a further referral may be made—
(i) under section 9(3)(c) (if section 12 does not apply), or
(ii) where section 12 applies, under subsection (2) of that section, and
(b) the registered medical practitioner to whom that referral is made becomes the independent doctor (replacing the outgoing doctor) and sections 10 to 12 (and this section) apply accordingly.
(7) Subsections (8) and (9) apply where the coordinating doctor—
(a) gives a notice under subsection (2) to the person seeking assistance, or
(b) receives a notice under that subsection given by the independent doctor in relation to the person seeking assistance.
(8) Where the coordinating doctor is a practitioner with the person’s GP practice, the coordinating doctor must, as soon as practicable, record the giving of the notice in the person’s medical records.
(9) In any other case—
(a) the coordinating doctor must, as soon as practicable, notify a registered medical practitioner with that practice of the giving of the notice, and
(b) the practitioner notified under paragraph (a) must, as soon as practicable, record the giving of the notice in the person’s medical records.”—(Kim Leadbeater.)
This new clause makes provision about the replacement of the coordinating doctor or the independent doctor where the doctor is unable or unwilling to continue to carry out their functions under the Bill.
Brought up, read the First and Second time, and added to the Bill.
“(1) This section applies where a person is not provided with assistance under section 23 because the coordinating doctor is not satisfied as to all of the matters mentioned in section 23(5).
(2) The coordinating doctor must make a report which—
(a) sets out the matters as to which they are not satisfied, and
(b) contains an explanation of why they are not satisfied of those matters.
(3) The Secretary of State may by regulations make provision about the content or form of the report.
(4) The coordinating doctor must give a copy of the report to—
(a) the person,
(b) if the coordinating doctor is not a practitioner with the person’s GP’s practice, a registered medical practitioner with that practice, and
(c) the Commissioner.”—(Kim Leadbeater.)
This new clause (intended to be inserted after Clause 27) requires the coordinating doctor to produce a report where assistance is not provided because they are not satisfied of all of the matters mentioned in Clause 23(5).
Brought up, read the First and Second time, and added to the Bill.
“(1) The Secretary of State must by regulations make provision about approved substances.
(2) The regulations must make provision about—
(a) the supply or offer for supply, or administration, of approved substances;
(b) the transportation, storage, handling and disposal of approved substances;
(c) the keeping of records of matters relating to approved substances.
(3) The regulations may in particular make provision—
(a) about the manufacture, importation, preparation or assembly of approved substances;
(b) for or in connection with the monitoring of matters relating to approved substances;
(c) requiring persons specified in the regulations, in specified cases, to give information to the Secretary of State.
(4) The regulations may in particular—
(a) make provision relating to approved substances that is similar to, or that corresponds to, any provision of the Human Medicines Regulations 2012 (S.I. 2012/1916);
(b) make provision applying any provision of those Regulations, with or without modifications, in relation to approved substances.
(The regulations may also amend the Human Medicines Regulations 2012.)
(5) The Secretary of State may by regulations make provision about devices made for use or used for, or in connection with, the self-administration of approved substances.
(6) Regulations under this section must make provision about enforcement (which must include, but need not be limited to, provision imposing civil penalties).
(7) Regulations under this section may make any provision that could be made by an Act of Parliament; but they may not amend this Act.
(8) In this section “device” includes information in electronic form for use in connection with a device.”—(Kim Leadbeater.)
This new clause (which is intended to replace clause 34) imposes a duty to make regulations about approved substances, and a power to make regulations about devices intended for use, or used, in connection with the self-administration of approved substances.
Brought up, and read the First time.
I beg to move, That the clause be read a Second time.
With this it will be convenient to discuss the following:
Amendment (b) to new clause 13, at end insert—
“(5A) The Secretary of State may only approve a device under subsection (5) if the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency has approved the device for that purpose.
(5B) Before making any regulations under this section, the Secretary of State must consult the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency.”
This amendment requires that the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency be consulted before making regulations and that medical devices can only be approved for self-administration if they have been approved by the MHRA.
Amendment (c) to new clause 13, at end insert—
“(5A) Regulations under subsection (5) must forbid the use of any device used for the self-administration of a gas.”
This requires the Secretary of State to forbid the use of medical devices which cause death by the administration of a gas.
Amendment (a) to new clause 13, leave out subsection (7).
This removes the power to make regulations that may make any provision that could be made by an Act of Parliament (known as Henry VIII power) from this new clause.
New clause 14—Prohibition on advertising—
“(1) The Secretary of State must by regulations make provision prohibiting—
(a) the publication, printing, distribution or designing (anywhere) of advertisements whose purpose or effect is to promote a voluntary assisted dying service;
(b) causing the publication, printing, distribution or designing of such advertisements.
(2) The regulations may contain exceptions (for example, for the provision of certain information to users or providers of services).
(3) Regulations under this section may make any provision that could be made by an Act of Parliament.
(4) But regulations under this section—
(a) may not amend this Act, and
(b) must provide that any offence created by the regulations is punishable with a fine.
(5) In this section “voluntary assisted dying service” means—
(a) any service for or in connection with the provision of assistance to a person to end their own life in accordance with this Act, or
(b) any other service provided for the purposes of any of sections 5 to 27.”
This clause imposes a duty to make regulations prohibiting advertisements to promote services relating to voluntary assisted dying under the Bill.
Amendment (b) to new clause 14, in subsection (2), leave out from “exceptions” to the end of subsection (3) and insert—
“( ) for the following—
communication made in reply to a particular request by an individual for information about a voluntary assisted dying service;
(b) communication which is—
(i) intended for health professionals or providers of voluntary assisted dying services, and
(ii) made in a manner and form unlikely to be seen by potential service users.
(3) Regulations under this section may make provision that could be made by an Act of Parliament, but may not amend this Act or the Suicide Act 1961.”
This amendment would limit the exceptions that can be created to the advertising ban set out in NC14 and also provides that regulations cannot amend the Suicide Act 1961, which includes the offence of assisting and encouraging suicide.
Amendment (a) to new clause 14, leave out subsection (3).
This removes the power to make regulations that may make any provision that could be made by an Act of Parliament (known as Henry VIII power) from this new clause.
New clause 15—Investigation of deaths etc—
“(1) In section 1 of the Coroners and Justice Act 2009 (duty to investigate certain deaths), after subsection (7) insert—
“(7A) In this Chapter a reference to an “unnatural death” does not include a death caused by the self-administration by the deceased of an approved substance, within the meaning of the Terminally Ill Adults (End of Life) Act 2025, that was provided to the deceased in accordance with that Act.”
(2) In section 20 of that Act (medical certificate of cause of death), after subsection (4) insert—
“(4A) Regulations under subsection (1) may make, in respect of cases where assistance was provided or purportedly provided to the deceased under the Terminally Ill Adults (End of Life) Act 2025—
(a) such provision that is similar to, or that corresponds to, provision mentioned in subsection (1) as the Secretary of State considers appropriate;
(b) such further provision as the Secretary of State considers appropriate.
(4B) Regulations under subsection (1) must provide that in cases where the cause of death appears, to the best of the knowledge and belief of the person issuing a certificate under the regulations, to be the self-administration by the deceased of an approved substance (within the meaning of the Terminally Ill Adults (End of Life) Act 2025) that was provided to the deceased in accordance with that Act, the certificate must—
(a) state the cause of death to be “assisted death”, and
(b) contain a record of the illness or disease which caused the person to be terminally ill within the meaning of that Act.”
(3) In Schedule 1 to that Act (suspension of investigations etc), in the definition in paragraph 1(6) of “homicide offence”, after paragraph (d) insert—
“(e) an offence under section 31, 32 or 33 of the Terminally Ill Adults (End of Life) Act 2025;”.”
This new clause provides that references in Chapter 1 of the Coroners and Justice Act 2009 (investigations into deaths) to unnatural deaths do not include deaths caused by self-administration of approved substances provided in accordance with the Bill. It makes offences under clauses 31 to 33 “homicide offences” for the purposes of that Act. It also amends the powers in that Act in respect of medical certificates of cause of death.
Amendment (a) to new clause 15, in subsection (1), leave out from “section” to “(medical” in subsection (2) and insert
“20 of the Coroners and Justice Act 2009”
This amendment ensures that deaths from assisted dying will still fall within the coroner’s duty to investigate deaths under section 1 of the Coroners and Justice Act 2009.
New clause 20—Guidance about operation of Act—
“(1) The Secretary of State must issue guidance relating to the operation of this Act.
(2) The guidance need not (but may) relate to matters about which the Welsh Ministers may issue guidance under subsection (4) (“Welsh devolved matters”).
(3) Before issuing guidance under subsection (1), the Secretary of State must consult—
(a) the Chief Medical Officer for England,
(b) the Chief Medical Officer for Wales,
(c) such persons with learning disabilities and other persons who have protected characteristics as the Secretary of State considers appropriate,
(d) such persons appearing to represent providers of health or care services, including providers of palliative or end of life care, as the Secretary of State considers appropriate,
(e) if any part of the guidance relates to Welsh devolved matters, the Welsh Ministers, and
(f) such other persons as the Secretary of State considers appropriate.
(4) The Welsh Ministers may issue guidance relating to the operation of this Act in Wales, but the guidance must only be about matters within devolved competence.
(5) For this purpose, a matter is “within devolved competence” if provision about it would be within the legislative competence of Senedd Cymru if it were contained in an Act of the Senedd.
(6) Before issuing guidance under subsection (4), the Welsh Ministers must consult—
(a) the Chief Medical Officer for Wales,
(b) the Secretary of State,
(c) such persons with learning disabilities and other persons who have protected characteristics as the Welsh Ministers consider appropriate,
(d) such persons appearing to represent providers of health or care services, including providers of palliative or end of life care, as the Welsh Ministers consider appropriate, and
(e) such other persons as the Welsh Ministers consider appropriate.
(7) When preparing guidance under this section, an appropriate national authority must have regard to the need to provide practical and accessible information, advice and guidance to—
(a) persons (including persons with learning disabilities) requesting or considering requesting assistance to end their own lives;
(b) the next of kin and families of such persons;
(c) the general public.
(8) An appropriate national authority must publish any guidance issued under this section.
(9) In this section—
“appropriate national authority” means the Secretary of State or the Welsh Ministers;
“protected characteristics” has the same meaning as in Part 2 of the Equality Act 2010 (see section 4 of that Act).”
This new clause (which is intended to replace clause 37) makes provision about guidance relating to the operation of the Bill.
New clause 21—Provision about the Welsh language—
“(1) In this section “relevant person” means a person in Wales who wishes to be provided with assistance to end their own life in accordance with this Act.
(2) Subsection (3) applies where the Welsh Ministers make regulations under section 39 (voluntary assisted dying services: Wales).
(3) Regulations under that section must make such provision as the Welsh Ministers consider appropriate for the purpose of ensuring that, where a relevant person indicates that they wish to communicate in Welsh, all reasonable steps are taken to secure that—
(a) communications made by a person providing a voluntary assisted dying service to the relevant person are in Welsh, and
(b) any report about the first or second assessment of the relevant person is in Welsh.
(4) Where a relevant person informs the Commissioner that they wish to communicate in Welsh, the Commissioner must take all reasonable steps to secure that—
(a) communications made by the Commissioner to the relevant person are in Welsh,
(b) each member of the panel to which the relevant person’s case is referred speaks Welsh, and
(c) communications made by that panel to the relevant person are in Welsh,
and any certificate of eligibility issued by that panel must be in Welsh.
(5) Regulations under section 7, 9, 10, 17 or 26 that specify the form of—
(a) a first or second declaration,
(b) a report about the first or second assessment of a person, or
(c) a final statement,
must make provision for the forms to be in Welsh (as well as in English).
(6) Before making regulations in pursuance of subsection (5), the Secretary of State must consult the Welsh Ministers.
(7) In this section—
“panel” and “referred” have the meaning given by paragraph 1 of Schedule 2;
“voluntary assisted dying service” has the meaning given by section 38.”
This new clause (which is intended to replace Clause 47) makes provision about the use of the Welsh language.
New clause 4—Monitoring by Chief Medical Officer—
“(1) The relevant Chief Medical Officer must—
(a) monitor the operation of the Act, including compliance with its provisions and any regulations or code of practice made under it,
(b) investigate, and report to the appropriate national authority on, any matter connected with the operation of the Act which the relevant national authority refers to the relevant Chief Medical Officer, and
(c) submit an annual report to the appropriate national authority on the operation of the Act.
(2) The relevant Chief Medical Officer’s report must include information about the occasions when—
(a) a report about the first assessment of a person does not contain a statement indicating that the coordinating doctor is satisfied as to all of the matters mentioned in section 9(2)(a) to (h),
(b) a report about the second assessment of a person does not contain a statement indicating that the independent doctor is satisfied as to all of the matters mentioned in section 10(2)(a) to (e),
(c) a panel has refused to grant a certificate of eligibility,
(d) the coordinating doctor has refused to make a statement under section 17(6).
(3) An annual report must include information about the application of the Act in relation to—
(a) persons who have protected characteristics, and
(b) any other description of persons specified in regulations made by the Secretary of State.
(4) When preparing an annual report, the relevant Chief Medical Officer must consult—
(a) The Commissioner, and
(b) such persons appearing to the relevant Chief Medical Officer to represent the interests of persons who have protected characteristics as the relevant Chief Medical Officer considers appropriate.
(5) An appropriate national authority must—
(a) publish any report received under this section,
(b) prepare and publish a response to any such report, and
(c) lay before Parliament or Senedd Cymru (as the case may be) a copy of the report and response.
(6) In this section “appropriate national authority” means the Secretary of State or the Welsh Ministers.
(7) In this section “protected characteristics” has the same meaning as in Part 2 of the Equality Act 2010 (see section 4 of that Act).
(8) In this section “relevant Chief Medical Officer” has the meaning given by section 37(5).”
This new clause would require the monitoring, investigation and reporting functions set out in the Bill to be carried out by the Chief Medical Officer instead of the Voluntary Assisted Dying Commissioner.
New clause 5—Implications for civil procedure rules and probate proceedings—
“(1) The Secretary of State must, within six months of the passing of this Act, publish a report setting out the implications of this Act on—
(a) the civil procedure rules, and
(b) probate proceedings.
(2) The report in subsection (1) must include an analysis of likely consequential changes to the civil procedure rules and probate proceedings in consequence of this Act.”
New clause 6—Board to consult communities—
“(1) The Commissioner must, within six months of being appointed under this Act, appoint a consultation board.
(2) The role of the board is to consult communities in order to report to the Commissioner on the impact of the Act on those communities.
(3) The Board must report to the Commissioner and the Secretary of State every 12 months from its appointment on its findings.
(4) The communities that the Board must consult include people from Black, Asian and Minority Ethnic communities.
(5) The Board may consult other groups in addition to those listed in subsection (4) as it considers appropriate.
(6) The Secretary of State must, within 3 months of receiving a report under subsection (3), lay that report before both Houses of Parliament.”
New clause 19—Collection of statistics—
“(1) The Voluntary Assisted Dying Commissioner must ensure that the statistics specified in Schedule (Statistics to be collected) are collected.
(2) The Commissioner must publish a yearly report setting out those statistics.
(3) The Secretary of State may, by regulation, vary the contents of Schedule (Statistics to be collected).”
Amendment 13, in clause 4, page 2, line 22, at end insert—
“(2A) A person may not be appointed under subsection (2) unless the appointment has the consent of the Health and Social Care Select Committee of the House of Commons.
(2B) In this section, references to the Health and Social Care Committee shall—
(a) if the name of that Committee is changed, be taken (subject to paragraph (b)) to be references to the Committee by its new name;
(b) if the functions of that Committee at the passing of this Act with respect to matters relating to the provision of assistance under this Act become functions of a different committee of the House of Commons, be taken to be references to the committee by whom the functions for the time being exercisable.”
Amendment 96, in clause 25, page 21, line 5, at end insert—
“(1A) A drug or other substance may only be approved under this Act if the Secretary of State is reasonably of the opinion that there is a scientific consensus that this drug (or other substance) or combination of drugs (or other substances), is effective at ending someone’s life without causing pain or other significant adverse side effects.”
This amendment ensures that drugs can only be approved if the Secretary of State is reasonably of the opinion that there is a scientific consensus that the drug is effective at ending someone’s life without causing pain or other significant adverse side effects.
Amendment 97, page 21, line 5, at end insert—
“(1A) A drug or other substance may only be approved under this Act if it has been licensed by the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency for that purpose.”
This amendment ensures that drugs can only be approved for this purpose if the MHRA has licensed those drugs for that purpose.
Amendment 98, page 21, line 5, at end insert—
“(1A) Nothing in subsection (1) requires the Secretary of State to approve any drugs or other substance if they conclude that there are no appropriate drugs or other substances to approve.”
If the Secretary of State concludes that no drugs or substance is appropriate to be used, then the Secretary of State is not required by subclause 25(1) to approve any.
Amendment 27, page 21, line 7, at end insert—
“(2A) The doses and types of lethal drugs specified in any regulations made under subsection (1) must be licensed by the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency.
(2B) The doses and types of lethal drugs to bring about the person’s death must be recommended by the guidelines of either—
(a) the National Institute of Clinical Excellence, or
(b) the All Wales Medicines Strategy Group in Wales, as appropriate, prior to licensing.”
This amendment will require the doses and types of lethal drugs to be licensed by the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency and to be recommended by either the National Institute of Clinical Excellence or the All Wales Medicines Strategy Group in Wales as appropriate prior to licensing.
Amendment 99, page 21, line 7, at end insert—
“(2A) The Secretary of State may not lay a draft statutory instrument containing (whether alone or with other provision) regulations under subsection (1) before both Houses of Parliament unless they also lay before both Houses a report setting out all relevant information on the likely time to death, complications (including pain) and likely side effect.”
This amendment requires that a report be provided to Parliament setting out the information available on the proposed drugs, including time to death, complications (including pain) and likely side effects. Such a report is required before Parliament votes to approve the drugs or substance. See consequential Amendment 100.
Amendment 69, page 21, line 8, leave out subsection (3) and insert—
“(3) See section (Regulation of approved substances and devices for self-administration) for powers to make provision about—
(a) approved substances, and
(b) devices for use or used in connection with the self-administration of approved substances.”
This is consequential on NC13.
Amendment 53, line 24, leave out clause 34
This amendment is consequential on NC13.
Amendment 54, line 34, leave out clause 35
This amendment is consequential on NC15.
Amendment 19, in clause 36, page 27, line 17, at end insert—
“(ba) how the provisions of this Act relate to the operation of—
(i) the Government’s strategy on suicide prevention,
(ii) the duties on clinicians and others to secure the right to life, including of those at risk of suicide, under paragraphs 1 and 2 of Article 2 (Right to Life) set out in Schedule 1 of the Human Rights Act 1998,
(iii) the Mental Health Act 1983,
(iv) deprivation of liberty safeguards as set out in Schedule A1 to the Mental Capacity Act 2005, and
(v) liberty protection safeguards as set out in Schedule AA1 to the Mental Capacity Act 2005.”
Amendment 70, page 27, line 20, at end insert—
“(ca) ensuring effective communication in connection with persons seeking assistance under this Act to end their own lives, including the use of interpreters;”
This amendment provides that a code of practice must be issued covering ensuring effective communication in connection with persons seeking assistance under the Bill.
Amendment 108, page 27, line 31, at end insert—
“(h) how the provisions of this Act, including but not limited to section 23, interact with the provisions of the Abortion Act 1967.”
Amendment 71, page 27, line 35, leave out subsection (3).
This amendment is consequential on amendment 70.
Amendment 20, page 28, line 5, leave out subsection (8) and insert—
“(8) If it appears to a court or tribunal conducting any criminal or civil proceedings that—
(a) a provision of a code, or
(b) a failure to comply with a code,
is relevant to a question arising in the proceedings, the provision or failure must be taken into account in deciding the question.”
Amendment 89, page 28, line 7, leave out clause 37.
This amendment is consequential on NC20.
Amendment 34, in clause 37, page 28, line 14, at end insert—
“(ii) persons from Black, Asian and Minority Ethnic communities and advocate groups representing those communities, and
(iii) representatives of the healthcare sector, including persons who work in hospices.”
Amendment 12, clause 38, page 28, line 36, leave out subsections (4) and (5) and insert—
“(4A) Regulations under subsection (1) may not amend, modify or repeal section 1 of the National Health Service Act 2006.”
This amendment would prevent section 1 of the National Health Service Act 2006, which sets out the purposes of the NHS, from being amended by regulations. Its effect would be to require changes to be made by an Act of Parliament instead.
Amendment 105, page 29, line 4, leave out subsection (6).
Amendment 15, page 29, line 5, at end insert—
“(6A) Regulations under this section must provide that, where a body other than a public authority provides voluntary assisted dying services under subsection (1), that body must publish an annual statement that includes information on the following—
(a) the number of persons to whom the body has provided a preliminary discussion under section 5(3);
(b) the number of to persons whom the body has assessed under section 9(1);
(c) the number of persons whom the body has assessed under section 10(1);
(d) the number of persons to whom assistance has been provided under section 23(2);
(e) the cost and revenue associated with providing such assistance; and
(f) any other matter that the Secretary of State may specify.”
This amendment would require private providers of the services permitted under the Act to publish annual statements of the numbers of people to whom they have provided those services. It would also require them to disclose their associated costs and revenue.
Amendment 92, in clause 39, page 29, line 13, leave out from “Wales” to end of line 14.
Amendment 106, page 29, line 16, leave out subsection (2)(a).
Amendment 107, page 29, line 22, leave out subsection (4)(a).
This amendment and amendment 93 ensure that the power under subsection (3) also covers provision securing that arrangements are made for the provision of services, so far as such provision is outside the legislative competence of the Senedd.
Amendment 93, page 29, line 27, at end insert—
“(b) a reference to provision about voluntary assisted dying services includes in particular provision securing that arrangements are made for the provision of such services.”
See the statement for Amendment 92.
Amendment 29, in clause 40, page 30, line 5, at end insert—
“(5) Any notification to the Commissioner made pursuant to regulations under this section must be forwarded by the Commissioner to the relevant Chief Medical Officer.
(6) The relevant Chief Medical Officer may exercise any power granted to the Commissioner under subsection (2).
(7) In this section “relevant Chief Medical Officer” has the meaning given by section 37(5).”
Amendment 21, in clause 43, page 31, line 15, at end insert—
“(4) For the first reporting period referred to under subsection (2) (a) the report must set out an assessment of the state of health services to persons with palliative and end of life care needs and the implications of this Act on those services.
(5) The report under subsection (4) must, in particular, include an assessment of the availability, quality and distribution of appropriate health services to persons with palliative and end of life care needs, including—
(a) pain and symptom management;
(b) psychological support for those persons and their families;
(c) information about palliative care and how to access it.”
This amendment would require the Secretary of State for Health and Social Care to prepare and publish an assessment of the availability, quality and distribution of palliative and end of life care services as part of the first report on implementation of the Act (to be undertaken within 1 year of the Act being passed). This would mirror the assessment already required as part of the 5 year review of the act.
Amendment 28, page 31, line 32, leave out clause 45.
This amendment is linked to NC4.
Amendment 35, clause 45, page 32, line 20, after “characteristics” insert
“, including persons representing Black, Asian and Minority Ethnic communities,”.
Amendment 36, in clause 46, page 33, line 11, after “disabilities” insert
“, and
(ii) persons from Black, Asian and Minority Ethnic communities”.
Amendment 90, page 33, line 18, leave out clause 47.
This amendment is consequential on NC21.
Amendment 39, in clause 47, page 33, line 19, after “provided” insert “in Wales”.
This amendment specifies that this section applies only to services provided in Wales.
Amendment 40, page 33, line 24, at end insert—
“(2A) Any entity providing a service or fulfilling a function under this Act must take all reasonable steps to ensure the particular health professionals providing a service or fulfilling a function under sections 5, 9,10, 12, 15, and 23 have fluent proficiency in the Welsh language, if the services are to be provided to a person in Welsh under subsection (1).
(2B) For the purposes of subsection (2A), “fluent” includes speaking fluent Welsh in order to enable conversations with the person in Welsh.
(2C) The Commissioner must take all reasonable steps to ensure members of Assisted Dying Panels will, if the person to whom the referral relates has asked for services to be provided in Welsh, when hearing from or questioning that person under section 15(4)(b), do so in Welsh.”
Amendment 103, in clause 50, page 34, line 24, leave out from “under” to end of line 29 and insert
“any provision of this Act unless a draft of the instrument has been laid before, and approved by a resolution of, each House of Parliament.”
This amendment would require all statutory instruments in the Act, except commencement orders, to be made by the draft affirmative procedure. It is linked with Amendment 104 which creates the power for the Secretary of State to use the made affirmative procedure in cases of emergency.
Amendment 72, page 34, line 24, after “10(9)”, insert—
“(Regulation of approved substances and devices for self-administration),”.
This amendment provides that regulations under NC13 are subject to the draft affirmative procedure.
Amendment 50, page 34, line 24, after “10(9),” insert “(Doctor independence)”.
This amendment makes regulations under NC7 [Doctor independence] subject to the affirmative procedure.
Amendment 100, page 34, line 24, after “10(9),” insert “25(1)”.
This amendment makes regulations under clause 25(1) subject to the draft affirmative procedure. It is consequential on Amendment 99.
Amendment 73, page 34, line 25, leave out “or 39” and insert—
“39, or (prohibition on advertising)”.
This amendment provides that regulations under NC14 are subject to the draft affirmative procedure.
Amendment 88, page 34, line 25, after “39” insert “or (Collection of statistics)”.
This amendment provides that the changes to NS2 should be made by affirmative regulations, and is consequential to NS2.
Amendment 104, page 34, line 32, at end insert—
“(5A) If they reasonably consider it urgent and necessary for the protection of others, the Secretary of State or the Welsh Ministers may dispense with the requirement to lay a draft statutory instrument.”
This amendment is linked with Amendment 103. It creates the power for the Secretary of State to use the made affirmative procedure in cases of emergency (this means that it would come into effect straight away but there would be a vote afterwards).
Amendment 76, in clause 53, page 36, line 12, at beginning insert “Subject as follows,”.
This amendment is consequential on amendment 77.
Amendment 77, page 36, line 12, at end insert “only.
(2) Sections (Regulation of approved substances and devices for self-administration), (Prohibition on advertising), 50 and 52, this section, and sections 54 and 55 extend to England and Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland.
(3) Section (No obligation to provide assistance etc)(8) and Schedule (Protection from detriment) extend to England and Wales and Scotland.”
This amendment provides for NC13 (regulation of approved substances etc) and NC14 (prohibition on advertising), and the general provisions of the Bill, to extend to each part of the United Kingdom; and for NC10 (no obligation to provide assistance etc) and NS1 (protection from detriment) to extend to England and Wales and Scotland.
Amendment (a) to amendment 77, in subsection (2), leave out
“(Regulation of approved substances and devices for self-administration),”.
This would provide that NC13 (regulation of approved substances etc…) does not extend to each part of the United Kingdom and only applies, like most of this Bill, to England and Wales.
Amendment (b) to amendment 77, in subsection (3), leave out “and Scotland”.
This amendment would provide that subsection (8) of NC10 (no obligation to provide assistance) and NS1 (protection from detriment) only extend to England and Wales.
Amendment 42, in clause 54, page 36, line 16, leave out subsections (2) to (5) and insert—
“(2) In relation to England, the provisions of this Act not brought into force by subsection (1) come into force on such day or days as the Secretary of State may by regulations appoint.”
This amendment will mean that, except as provided by subsection (1), provisions of the Bill will only commence in England when the Secretary of State makes a commencement order, and not automatically.
Amendment 37, in clause 54, page 36, line 21, leave out subsection (4) and insert—
“(4) Regulations under this section cannot be made unless the Secretary of State has previously—
(a) made a statement to the effect that in their view the provisions of the Act are compatible with the Convention rights; or
(b) made a statement to the effect that although they are unable to make a statement under subsection (4)(a), the Government nevertheless wishes to proceed with commencing provisions of the Act.
(4A) The statement required by subsection (4) must be laid before both Houses of Parliament.
(4B) A statement under subsection (4)(b) must include the steps the Government plans to take to resolve any incompatibility.”
Amendment 3, page 36, line 22, leave out “four” and insert “three”.
Amendment 94, page 36, line 25, leave out “Wales” and insert—
“sections 39(1) and (2) and (Provision about the Welsh language)(2) and (3) which come into force on such day as the Welsh Ministers may by regulations appoint.”
This amendment provides that the Welsh Ministers have power to commence clauses 39(1) and (2) and NC21(2) and (3), and that other provisions of the Bill come into force in accordance with subsections (1) to (4) of this clause.
Amendment 95, page 36, line 26, leave out subsection (6).
This amendment is consequential on Amendment 94.
New schedule 2—Statistics to be collected—
“Characteristics
1 The Voluntary Assisted Dying Commissioner must collect the following information about persons requesting assisted dying—
(a) sex,
(b) age,
(c) self-reported ethnicity,
(d) level of education,
(e) Index of Multiple Deprivation based on postcode,
(f) region of residence,
(g) marital status,
(h) living status (alone, with others, in a care home etc),
(i) main condition leading to “terminal illness” fulfilment,
(j) other medical conditions,
(k) other psychiatric / mental health conditions,
(l) presence of physical disability, and
(m) presence of intellectual disability.
Health and Care Support
2 The Commissioner must collect statistics on the following information about health and care support—
(a) whether the person was, before the request—
(i) under a specialist palliative care team, and
(ii) under a psychiatry team,
(b) whether following the request there has been—
(i) referral to specialist palliative care team, and
(ii) referral to psychiatry team following request.
Information about requests
3 The Commissioner must collect statistics on the following information about the requests for assistance—
(a) the main reason for requesting assisted dying,
(b) any other subsidiary reason for requesting assisted dying,
(c) any previous requests for assisted dying from that patient,
(d) time between first request and subsequent request(s),
(e) number of times a second opinion was requested under section 10, and
(f) number of times the second opinion disagreed with the first.
Information about refused requests
4 The Commissioner must collect statistics following information about requests that are refused—
(a) at what stage of the process was the request refused, and
(b) reasons for refusal.
Information about the process
5 The Commissioner must collect statistics on the following information about the process—
(a) time from initial discussion to first declaration,
(b) time from first declaration to first doctor’s assessment,
(c) time from first doctor’s assessment to second doctor’s assessment,
(d) time from second doctor’s assessment to panel approval,
(e) time from panel approval to second declaration,
(f) time from second declaration to provision of assistance to self-administer lethal drugs,
(g) time from panel approval to death (whether by lethal drug or natural causes),
(h) duration of relationship between patient and coordinating doctor at first request, and
(i) use of a proxy and reason for using proxy.
Information about clinicians and pharmacies
6 The Commissioner must collect statistics on the following information about clinicians and pharmacies—
(a) number of clinicians participating, their speciality, and number of assisted deaths each carries out per year, and
(b) number of participating pharmacies; number of times assisted dying drugs are dispensed.
Information about Assisted Dying Panel processes
7 The Commissioner must collect statistics on the following information about Assisted Dying Panel process—
(a) number of applications made,
(b) number of applications granted and rejected,
(c) reasons for rejection,
(d) whether family members informed of proceedings,
(e) whether family members took part in proceedings,
(f) number of requests for reconsideration made,
(g) number of reconsideration requests granted and rejected, and
(h) reasons for granting requests.
Information on approved substances
8 The Commissioner must collect statistics on the following information about the approved substances—
(a) name of drug(s) used for the assisted death,
(b) whether intravenous or oral self-administration is used,
(c) presence and nature of complications following self-administration of drugs (vomiting, regurgitation, seizures, regained consciousness, other),
(d) time from self-administration to loss of consciousness,
(e) time from self-administration to death,
(f) whether emergency services called at any time following self-administration of drugs,
(g) location of death,
(h) health care professionals present at self-administration,
(i) non-professionals present at self-administration,
(j) health care professionals present at death,
(k) non-professionals present at death.”
Amendment 82, in schedule 2, page 41, line 18, leave out sub-paragraph (1) and insert—
“(1) The Judicial Appointments Commission must make arrangements for the appointments to a list of persons eligible to sit as members of panels.”
This amendment requires that panel members be appointed by the Judicial Appointments Commission. It is linked with Amendments 83, 84, 85 and 86.
Amendment 83, page 41, leave out lines 23 to 26 and insert—
“but has not reached the age specified in section 11 (Tenure of office of judges of Senior Courts) of the Senior Courts Act 1981.”
This amendment requires that the legal member of the Panel is someone who holds high judicial office or has held high judicial office but not yet reached the mandatory retirement age. It is linked with Amendments 83, 84, 85, and 86.
Amendment 41, page 41, line 34, at end insert—
“(2A) In Wales, the Commissioner must take all reasonable steps to ensure each member of a panel has fluent proficiency in the Welsh language if services or functions in the Act are to be provided to an individual in Welsh under section 47(1).
(2B) For the purposes of subsection (2A), “fluent” includes speaking fluent Welsh.”
Amendment 84, page 42, line 2, leave out “or deputy judge”.
This amendment ensures that only High Court judges, and not deputy High Court judges, can chair the panel. It is linked with Amendments 83, 84, 85 and 86.
Amendment 85, page 42, line 2, at end insert—
“(4) All judges of the High Court are automatically on the list and will remain so for the duration of their appointment to the High Court.
(5) If they have not already, all persons on the list (whether as a legal member, psychiatrist member, or social care member) must take the judicial oath.”
This amendment makes all High Court judges automatically eligible to chair panels without needing further application and it requires that the non-legal members take the judicial oath before they can sit. It is linked with Amendments 83, 84, 85 and 86.
Amendment 86, page 43, line 5, at end insert—
“(3) Panels shall have the same powers, privileges and authority as the High Court.”
This amendment gives the panel the same powers as the High Court. It is linked with Amendments 83, 84, 85 and 86.
It is a privilege to open today’s debate and to present to the House the amendments tabled in my name, a number of which relate to issues that I promised to return to when they were raised in Committee. All amendments in my name have been drafted with technical advice and expertise from civil servants from the Department of Health and Social Care and the Ministry of Justice, along with the brilliant Government Legal Department and the Office of the Parliamentary Counsel, in order to make the Bill workable and to give coherence to the statute book, as confirmed by the Minister for Care, my hon. Friend  the Member for Aberafan Maesteg (Stephen Kinnock) , and the Minister for Courts and Legal Services, my hon. and learned Friend  the Member for Finchley and Golders Green (Sarah Sackman) , in their recent letter to MPs. Some are technical and drafting amendments, and all are there to strengthen the Bill, so I hope that colleagues will be able to support them, wherever they stand on the principle of assisted dying.
I know that many colleagues wish to speak today, so I will endeavour to speak with brevity. I will speak first to the new clauses that stand in my name, starting with new clause 13. This important new clause and the related amendments would create a regulatory framework and safeguards around the approved substances referred to in the Bill by imposing a duty to make regulations about those substances and a power to make regulations about devices for use in connection with their self-administration.
Amendment 72 provides that the regulations relating to approved substances would be subject to the affirmative procedure, meaning that they must be laid before Parliament and approved by resolution of both Houses, providing important parliamentary oversight. These measures ensure that the substances used in assisted dying are subject to a specific and appropriate regulatory regime.
I am genuinely looking for clarification. As a former Cabinet Minister in the Scottish Government, I jealously guard the devolution settlement. I wonder how the extension of some of these clauses to include Scotland will be interpreted. What conversations have taken place between my hon. Friend, Scotland’s Lord Advocate and the Scottish Government?
I have taken legal advice from Government officials to ensure that devolution is respected at every stage in proceedings. Where legislation that affects other jurisdictions needs to be amended, those conversations have already started and will continue.
Will the hon. Lady give way?
No, I am going to make some progress, if that is okay.
The substances that would be used would not be new substances. As we know, assisted dying is available in many other jurisdictions, and there are substances that have been used safely and, in some cases, for many years. Their safety and efficacy has been proven around the world, but they do need to be treated differently, which is the purpose of new clause 13.
Will the hon. Lady give way?
Will the hon. Lady give way?
I am going to make some progress.
However, it is most likely that these products are already licensed for other purposes. They could well be regulated through the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency and within the Human Medicines Regulations 2012 for the purposes of the Bill, but it is important that time is given—
Will my hon. Friend give way?
I will.
As an operating department practitioner with more than 20 years of experience, I emphasise that controlling and administering drugs is already a key part of every healthcare professional’s practice. Medicines   management is at the front and centre of everything we do when handling drugs. Does my hon. Friend agree that the safeguards added to this Bill, along with the existing frameworks, are more than adequate to deal with this?
I thank my hon. Friend for sharing her expertise, along with other colleagues with medical backgrounds who have worked with me on this amendment.
rose—
Given what you have said, Mr Speaker, I will make some progress. [Interruption.] A lot of Members wish to speak today.
I now turn to new clause 14 and amendment 73. The new clause imposes a duty to make regulations prohibiting advertising of services related to voluntary assisted dying. This issue was discussed in Committee, following an amendment tabled by  the hon. Member for West Worcestershire (Dame Harriett Baldwin) . It was proposed that there should be no advertising of assisted dying services. I agree, and there was a consensus on that in the Committee. There were some issues with the previous amendment’s workability, so I gave a commitment to return to the matter on Report—hence the inclusion of this new clause. Amendment 73 provides that regulations under new clause 14 would be subject to the affirmative procedure, providing parliamentary oversight.
On the evidential basis, on page 15 of today’s edition of The Times there is a story about a gentleman who was born in South Africa and lives in Australia. He has come to London this week for this particular Bill in order to give his story. He was diagnosed with pancreatic cancer and told he had only two weeks to live: he lived for three years and one month, and he is still living. There is a growing evidential basis. He said that he was never afraid to die, but he says that he is afraid of the process of dying, and the hon. Lady is the initiator of that. Will she acknowledge the evidential basis and the importance of this subject? Does she realise that the evidential basis against this Bill is growing?
I thank the hon. Gentleman for the intervention, although I am not sure that it is relevant to the banning of advertising for assisted dying services, which I will try to stay focused on.
Will the hon. Lady give way?
I am afraid that I am going to have to make some progress, based on the number of Members who wish to speak today.
I thank  the hon. Member for West Worcestershire and the hon. Member for Reigate (Rebecca Paul)  for working with me on amendment 73, and I am very pleased that they support it.
Will the hon. Lady give way?
I will not—sorry.
New clause 15 and amendment 54 make changes to the Coroners and Justice Act 2009 that the Bill would necessitate. They would insert a new clause into the Act to provide that deaths that occur in accordance with the Bill will be certified by an attending practitioner and medical examiner and will not be subject to a coronial investigation.
Will the hon. Lady give way?
I am afraid not.
Coroners investigate suspicious or violent deaths, or situations in which the cause of death is unknown. Assisted deaths would not fall into these categories, and there would therefore be no need for a default coronial investigation. This will ensure that any unnecessary delays and distress for bereaved families are avoided. These are not unexpected deaths; sadly, they were inevitable.
Will my hon. Friend give way?
I will not, I am afraid.
It is the manner and timing of their death about which the patient will make a legal, informed choice, having been thoroughly assessed. As Professor Aneez Esmail has said, “I cannot think of any death that would be the subject of greater scrutiny in advance of the person dying than an assisted death. The process far exceeds the level of safeguarding that is in place for many of the deaths that are, at present, routinely reviewed by medical examiners and not referred to a coroner.” Of course, anyone can report a death—including an assisted death—to the coroner, or indeed to the police, if they have any concerns that it was not carried out in accordance with the Act, and if any offences have been committed, they will be investigated.
Subsection (2) of new clause 15 requires that the medical certificate of cause of death must state the death as an assisted death, but it must also record the illness or disease that caused the person to be terminally ill and enabled them to receive assistance under the Act. This is really important for data collection and monitoring. In jurisdictions with similar legislation, around 70% of patients have some form of cancer, and the new clause would ensure that data is collected, not only in relation to how many people access assisted dying but in relation to the terminal illnesses that make them eligible.
I now turn to new clause 20, which relates to the guidance about the operation of the Act, including with respect to devolution. Put simply, new clause 20 ensures that the right rules and responsibilities sit with the right people. First, it places the obligation to issue guidance with the Secretary of State. Secondly, it enables Welsh Ministers to issue guidance on devolved matters. The Secretary of State must consult the chief medical officers in order to have the benefit of their expertise, which is also really important. New clause 20 also adds a provision that ensures that the Secretary of State must consult people with learning disabilities and people with protected characteristics, which include disability, race, religion and belief.
Will my hon. Friend give way?
I am going to make some progress, I am afraid.
The Secretary of State must also consult providers of health and care services, including palliative and end-of-life care. I am really pleased that Hospice UK is supporting this amendment—it is very important that those voices are heard. The Secretary of State can also consult anyone else they feel to be appropriate, creating a flexible and holistic approach.
Turning to devolution, this long-overdue reform would apply to England and Wales, which share a criminal justice system. Health is a devolved matter, of course, and I have recognised from the outset that the legislation must respect devolution. I am fully committed to observing the same conventions that the Government would if this were a Government Bill. I have worked with UK Government officials to ensure that the right steps are taken at the right time by the right people. I have engaged with colleagues in the Welsh Government—I met the Welsh Health Minister in Cardiff, and there have been ongoing detailed discussions between the two teams of Government officials to ensure the workability of the legislation in both jurisdictions, in line with the devolution settlement.
Amendments 92 to 95 also ensure that the devolution settlement is respected and adhered to. I thank  the right hon. Member for Dwyfor Meirionnydd (Liz Saville Roberts)  and  the hon. Member for Chesham and Amersham (Sarah Green) , not only for their diligent work on the Bill Committee but for working with me on the amendments in relation to Wales, and I thank the Welsh Government for their guidance and support. I hope that colleagues across the House can support these new clauses and amendments.
I now turn to new clause 21, which makes specific provision about the use of the Welsh language. The conversations that happen at the end of a person’s life are extremely personal and should be handled with the utmost sensitivity. It is very important that they are conducted in the best interests of the patient, and a big part of that is using clear communication. In this respect, language matters, so if a patient in Wales has Welsh as their first or preferred language, all efforts should be made to ensure they can communicate with voluntary assisted dying services in Welsh. I committed to this in Committee, and have made good on that commitment.
Turning to amendments 76 and 77, as with any Bill, it is important that the amending legislation secures overall coherence with the statute book. As such, the clauses relating to medicines, advertising and employment protections amend, or confer power to amend, other legislation that currently extends to parts of the UK. Of course, this does not mean the provision of assisted dying, but, for example, they extend the prohibition on advertising to the whole of the UK and apply the employment protections in the Bill to Scotland. That is in line with the guidance I have received from legal experts, and as such I hope all colleagues can support these amendments. If the Bill passes, I will, if necessary, work with other devolved Administrations in the same way as I have worked with the Welsh Government to ensure that devolution is respected.
That concludes the explanations of the amendments tabled in my name. Many colleagues are keen to speak, so I am not going to comment on all the amendments in the group; I will just make two comments about amendments that are not in my name, and allow other people plenty of time to speak.
Amendment 42, tabled by my hon. Friend  the Member for Newcastle-under-Lyme (Adam Jogee) , would not only try to remove the backstop for the provision of assisted dying in England, but create a number of other issues in relation to commencement. If Parliament chooses to give this choice to terminally ill people, there cannot be a clause in the Bill that would prevent that from being available as soon as it was safe and practicable. But the amendment would remove the four-year backstop. It would also prevent the appointment of the voluntary assisted dying commissioner and create a potential commencement gap between England and Wales. Given that, I have been strongly advised that the amendment would create serious workability issues. I urge colleagues who want an operable Bill to join me in rejecting the amendment.
To finish, I am pleased to support amendment 21, tabled by  the hon. Member for Twickenham (Munira Wilson) . I thank her for her engagement with the Bill and the amendment, which would require the Secretary of State to prepare and publish an assessment of the availability, quality and distribution of palliative and end-of-life care, as part of the first report on the implementation of the Act, mirroring the assessment already required as part of the five-year review.
Although the Bill seeks to address what in some respects is a very specific issue in terms of the failings of the current law, it has become part of a much-needed broader conversation about death, dying and end-of-life care. We all have our own experiences of death, loss and grief, and we do not talk about them enough. I am really pleased that the Bill has led to many conversations up and down the country; whatever our views, that has to be a positive thing.
Will the hon. Lady give way?
I have nearly finished.
I have had many such conversations over recent months with those who support the amendment, including with palliative care doctors, nurses, hospice staff, GPs, Hospice UK and Marie Curie. I thank them all for their constructive engagement with the Bill. I cannot imagine that anyone in this place is not truly grateful for the outstanding work done every day by the wonderful people working in palliative and end-of-life care in every one of our constituencies. Many of us, if not most of us, will have personal experience of the kindness and compassion that those people have shown to our own families and friends.
But this is not an either/or conversation. Palliative and end-of-life care and assisted dying can and do work side by side to give terminally ill patients the care and choice that they deserve in their final days. Just as there should not be an either/or for dying people, there should also not be an either/or for us as legislators in having to choose between supporting assisted dying or other end-of-life choices. That is why I am supporting amendment 21:   to ensure that in this place we channel our energies into supporting all options available to terminally ill people—something that I have always committed to do.
It is a privilege to be called at this stage in the debate. My principal reason for voting against the Bill on Second Reading was my concern that vulnerable people would be put at risk. I agreed to serve on the Bill Committee to do what I could to allay my concerns about that issue and address some of the issues raised by others. I do not think that the revised version of the Bill properly or completely reflects the concerns expressed on a multitude of different occasions. Consequently, it does not fully mitigate the risks to vulnerable groups.
We all recognise that decision making of any kind does not take place in a vacuum and that, in all parts of life, we live in a particular context. The Equality Act 2010 recognises that many people face discrimination or unfair treatment as a result of particular characteristics and that reasonable steps should be taken to eliminate that. It was very clear from the oral evidence sessions that particular care has to be taken to assess the context within which people are making the decision to seek an assisted death: if they suffer from a mental illness or eating disorder, if they are from a low-income or ethnic minority background, if they suffer from a disability or if they are in an abusive relationship. Those factors are likely to lead to an increased risk that someone will seek an assisted death that they would not have sought if those factors were not present.
In Committee, I and others made the point that it would have been desirable to have received an equality impact assessment before the detailed work of Committee scrutiny had begun, so that Committee members had a sense of how the proposed legislation would impact groups that we know can suffer disproportionate levels of disadvantage.
Will the hon. Lady give way?
I will not, if that is okay.
We were told that it was not practical to produce such an assessment until after Committee stage, as it would be necessary to assess the impact of amendments made in Committee.
The equality impact assessment was finally published five weeks ago. I have to say that I was pretty astounded. It does not recognise that certain groups in this country may have their lives prematurely shortened as a result of this legislation; instead, it concerns itself with the barriers that vulnerable people may face when trying to access assisted dying. I find that astonishing. Did the people who drafted the assessment not hear the speech of  the hon. Member for Vauxhall and Camberwell Green (Florence Eshalomi)  on Second Reading? She spoke with passion about how the underlying inequalities in access to healthcare experienced by those from black and minority ethnic backgrounds would be exacerbated if the Bill passed unamended. Did they not listen to the oral evidence that Dr Jamilla Hussain gave to the Bill Committee? She talked about her experience of working   with racialised communities in Bradford and their fears of being pushed disproportionately towards an assisted dying pathway. Did they not listen to the testimony of Dr Miro Griffiths on the experience and concerns  of disabled people—testimony that has been echoed  by Baroness Tanni Grey-Thompson and the actress  Liz Carr?
I find it inexplicable that the framing of the impact on vulnerable people should be the removal of barriers to accessing assisted dying and not, as it should be, the increased risk to their health and wellbeing that the Bill presents. I am concerned that we are thinking about the impact on vulnerable people solely with reference to those who are suffering a terminal illness with less than six months to live. We are not thinking about the impact on wider society of introducing a concept of lives not being worth living and how that might disproportionately affect our more vulnerable communities.
My new clause 19 and consequential new schedule 2 and amendment 88 seek to ensure that a comprehensive range of statistics are collected about those who seek and receive an assisted death, so that proper and complete monitoring of requests can be carried out. It is imperative that we get the most detailed possible picture of who is requesting an assisted death so that any patterns of disproportionality can be properly detected and addressed.
What assurances does the Bill give to the families of people with a disability, or those with mental health issues and those who are anorexic? I do not see any. Does the hon. Lady see any assurances for those who want to end their lives but suffer from those ailments?
I welcome that intervention. I spoke extensively about the Bill’s impact on anorexic people, and I am not satisfied that those concerns have been addressed.
I am pleased to support amendment 21 tabled by my good friend, colleague and constituency neighbour, my hon. Friend  the Member for Twickenham (Munira Wilson) , which has attracted support from across the House. It would require the Secretary of State to report on the impact that the Act has had on the healthcare available to those with palliative and end-of-life care needs. I am really pleased that  the hon. Member for Spen Valley (Kim Leadbeater)  has agreed to accept the amendment.
I am also pleased to support amendments 103 and 104 in the name of my other constituency neighbour, my hon. Friend  the Member for Wimbledon (Mr Kohler) . They seek to make all statutory instruments made under the Act subject to the affirmative procedure rather than the negative procedure. As it stands, the Act will come into force in four years’ time with no further scrutiny by MPs, yet a whole host of issues that have been delegated to the Secretary of State or have not even been considered will need to be legislated for after Royal Assent. As the Bill stands, the only way for Parliament to scrutinise those powers will be to call for a 90-minute debate on a motion that cannot be amended and will be voted on only if the Leader of the Opposition calls for a vote. Making statutory instruments subject to the affirmative procedure rather than the negative procedure would mean that the Secretary of State, whoever that is, can exercise the powers delegated to them only with the   approval of Parliament. For an issue as sensitive and profound as assisted dying, I believe that to be an appropriate level of scrutiny.
Will the hon. Lady give way?
I am sorry, but I will make some progress.
In a similar vein, I plan to support the amendments in the name of  the right hon. Member for Tonbridge (Tom Tugendhat) , which seek to remove all Henry VIII powers from the Bill and from the amendments introduced by the hon. Member for Spen Valley. I will support the right hon. Member’s amendments if they are selected for a vote, as I do not believe that the use of Henry VIII powers is appropriate or necessary.
I want to speak against amendment 94 in the name of the hon. Member for Spen Valley. It appears to be innocuous, but in reality it would reverse the effect of an amendment that I had accepted in Committee. The Bill as originally drafted would create an enormous constitutional minefield. It seeks to amend the criminal law of England and Wales, which is a reserved matter for the UK Parliament, and simultaneously to make provision for healthcare, which is a matter devolved to the Senedd in Wales. The Senedd debated a motion calling on the Welsh Government to support the principles of assisted dying, but it was defeated by 19 votes to 26. The motion was non-binding, but the Bill gives the UK Parliament the power to impose on the Senedd in Wales a measure that it has expressly said it does not want. The Bill as amended in Committee would give the Senedd the power to decide for itself when it is ready to bring the Bill into force.
Amendment 94 would reverse that provision and deprive the Senedd of the right to exercise its legitimate powers. It is not just that the amendment would restore the constitutional loophole that the Committee had closed; it threatens to create real problems and risks for Welsh citizens if the Senedd is forced to implement the Bill before its devolved healthcare system is ready. I urge fellow Members to have regard to the Committee’s decision and vote against amendment 94.
I will briefly speak in favour of a couple of other amendments. I remain highly concerned at the idea of a future Secretary of State having the power to change the National Health Service Act 1946—specifically section 1, which sets out the purpose for which the NHS exists—by using regulations instead of an Act Parliament. Once that power exists, it can be used not once, but at any time, to make fundamental changes to what our NHS is for. I was dismayed to see a change of this magnitude made to the Bill in Committee, and I will vote for amendment 12, in the name of  the hon. Member for Mitcham and Morden (Dame Siobhain McDonagh) , to reverse it.
Amendment 42, in the name of  the hon. Member for Newcastle-under-Lyme (Adam Jogee) , seeks to remove the automatic commencement of this Bill after four years. For the vast majority of Acts of Parliament, the Secretary of State decides when to bring the key provisions into force, rather than it happening automatically. The effect of the provisions of this Bill is that even if we have a covid pandemic or the Secretary of State realises  that the adequate training has not yet been completed, it will still come into force—come what may—after four years. That is not safe. It is unusual and reckless, and for that reason I support amendment 42.
Amendment 13, in the name of  the hon. Member for Glasgow West (Patricia Ferguson) , would require the appointment of the new voluntary assisted dying commissioner to be approved by the Health and Social Care Committee. The commissioner, a role created from scratch, will be a high-profile, influential and important position. Adding a second layer of approval would add more rigour to the appointment process, and provide transparency in the event of any problems that arise. It is vital that Members of this House have the opportunity to scrutinise and debate that new role, which was not included in the Bill on Second Reading.
Thank you, Mr Speaker, for allowing me to rise to speak to new clause 6, which proposes a special representative for ethnic minorities. I am not white, as some Members may have noticed. The fact that my presence in this House is unremarkable is in and of itself remarkable. That did not happen by chance; it happened because of those who came before me.
The Mother of the House, my right hon. Friend   the Member for Hackney North and Stoke Newington (Ms Abbott) , has spoked powerfully in this debate, and I know that my unremarkable presence here is due to her remarkable achievements. We may not always hold the same opinions, but we have always shared the same Labour values. She will never know how grateful we all are to her. I may be part of the last generation of MPs who can say this to her while she is in the House: thank you.
My hon. Friend  the Member for Vauxhall and Camberwell Green (Florence Eshalomi)  has spoken powerfully in this debate, and my right hon. Friend  the Member for Walsall and Bloxwich (Valerie Vaz)  has tabled new clause 6. I know I stand on their shoulders too, and I do not doubt their good intentions, but this Bill has nothing to do with the colour of my skin. New clause 6 proposes a special representative for ethnic minorities. I disagree with the new clause, because the colour of my skin has no bearing here and no special place in this debate. Equalities data will be reported through the Equality and Human Rights Commission, as set out in clause 51, and the Secretary of State can already consult community representatives. For every person of every skin colour, this Bill gives those already dying a choice to end their suffering—
Order. We need to make sure that contributions are tied to the amendments. We are not debating the general points of the Bill—we have gone past that. The hon. Gentleman is making more of a Third Reading speech, which he might want to save.
It is to the point of where we are—
Order. I will make that decision. Please do not challenge the Chair.
I do apologise, Mr Speaker.
What I meant to say is that new clause 6 would introduce a special representative for ethnic minorities, and I am trying to explore why we do not need one. A duty to consult is already included in clause 51.
This is a very sensitive issue. There is data to support the fact that people from minoritised ethnic groups are less likely to trust their health professionals—the figure is 18% among the general public, but as high as 30% among those groups. Does my hon. Friend not think it is necessary to make sure there are additional protections for those who face additional barriers, such as people from minoritised ethnic groups?
My hon. Friend makes a powerful point, and other hon. Members have also spoken powerfully about the impact that the Bill could have on ethnic minorities. Does any hon. Member know how many ethnic minorities access assisted dying in other nations? I will give way on this point;  the hon. Member for Richmond Park (Sarah Olney)  raised it earlier.
The hon. Member calls me to speak. If we do not know, it is probably because those other nations are not collecting the data. My position is that we should be collecting the data, which is why hon. Members should vote for my new clause 19.
We do know. Ethnic minorities are less likely to access assisted dying in jurisdictions where it is in place. In Oregon, 10% of those accessing assisted dying are ethnic minorities, but they make up 40% of the population. In California, ethnic minorities make up 15% of people accessing the option, but 30% of the population. However, that is not the point. The point of the Bill is to give people the choice to end their life regardless of the colour of their skin. There is no special quality about the colour of my skin that affects my access or the need for a special representative in this case, which is covered by the ECHR and by the Secretary of State.
I am quite perplexed by my hon. Friend’s speech, but I would like to understand whether he has data related to the demographics of those jurisdictions compared with the UK. If he does, could he present it to the House to support his argument?
I have spent a lot of time around data, but I am not sure that I understand the question.
Will the hon. Member give way?
I will make a bit more progress.
This has been a heated debate, and hon. Members on both sides of the House feel strongly about it. I am grateful to Members who came before me, who made my place here possible and who have spoken so powerfully and movingly in this debate, but I believe—and the evidence shows—that the colour of my skin does not belong in discussion of the Bill.
I rise to speak to amendment (a) to new clause 15, tabled in my name, which I hope hon. Members will support. Although it may seem technical, it is in fact a simple amendment  with a significant impact. It will ensure that there is genuine protection against abuse, proper detection of coercion, and effective scrutiny of how the law works in practice. Simply put, it will ensure that deaths from assisted dying under the Bill will still fall within the coroner’s duty to investigate deaths under section 1 of the Coroners and Justice Act 2009. I will explain why that is important.
Like many hon. Members, I have been deeply concerned from the outset about how the Bill is drafted, its workability, and its impact on the NHS and on the lives of vulnerable people up and down the country. To be clear, my view is that one unintended death as a result of the Bill becoming law is one too many. I humbly ask hon. Members who are still considering their position, or who are minded to support the Bill, to consider this point about my amendment carefully: what is an acceptable error rate?
Based on the figures in the Government’s impact assessment, which I think underestimates the impact, even a 1% error rate would see a minimum of 13 wrongful deaths in year 1, with 45 per year by year 10. A 5% error rate would see 65 deaths in year 1 and 227 in year 10. A 10% error rate would see 131 deaths in year 1 and 455 in year 10. As I say, I think those are low-ball estimates, but they are nevertheless chilling. If this law is passed, it will be exceptionally difficult to say whether there have been errors or instances of abuse; or, at the very least, any errors picked up will be but a fraction of the true picture, as tragically those who would testify to the fact will already be dead. My amendment (a) to new clause 15 directly addresses that issue.
In England and Wales, a coroner will investigate a death when certain legal conditions are met. This duty is primarily governed by section 1 of the Coroners and Justice Act 2009. Judge Thomas Teague KC, who served until 2024 as the chief coroner of England and Wales, notes:
“any death arising as a consequence of the ingestion or administration of a lethal substance constitutes an unnatural death which the local coroner is under a statutory duty to investigate”.
Clearly, assisted dying meets that definition, and it is right that such deaths be afforded the best possible posthumous judicial scrutiny.
Does the hon. Lady not feel that the provisions in the Bill already have safeguards? Also, and most importantly, does she not feel that putting a family through a coronial process when the death is expected is unfair, unjust and completely beyond the bounds of what coroners are meant to do?
On the first point, I do not believe that the Bill is strong enough as it stands. On the second point, we are already dealing with the fact that families are not even guaranteed knowledge of their loved one having an assisted death, so I do not think the hon. Lady’s point is entirely to be considered.
As it stands, the Bill would disapply the duty of the coroner to investigate in the case of an assisted death that has been carried out in accordance with the Bill’s provisions. New clause 15, specifically, would amend the Coroners and Justice Act to clarify that assisted death does not constitute “unnatural death” for the purposes of the Act. I think it takes an extraordinary  leap of imagination not to conceive of deliberately self-administering lethal drugs as anything but an unnatural death.
I am grateful to the hon. Lady for giving way; I want to support her in what she is saying. We are going through a process, as we consider the appalling situation of coercive control in domestic abuse cases, where a person who is a victim may not realise they have been a victim until years later. Obviously, a person who has gone through an assisted death will have no years later. Is the amendment not a way of making sure that we guard against the evil of coercive control?
I thank the hon. Member for his intervention and I completely agree with him. These are the sorts of safeguards that even the promoter of the Bill is saying should be there. I do not think that they are in the Bill and my amendment to new clause 15 would make them much stronger.
My hon. Friend is right in what she says. Those of us who are opposed to the death penalty, for example, are against it because we do not believe in the infallibility of the state. The state can get things wrong; professionals can get things wrong—and when they do, there should be a proven, clear path as to how that wrongdoing can be identified, to try to ensure that it does not occur again.
I thank my hon. Friend. The statistics I quoted earlier are pretty clear on the point he makes. Let me make some progress.
The work undertaken by the coroner is not a box-ticking exercise or a bureaucratic hurdle. In the context of assisted dying, it is an extremely powerful deterrent against abuse and malpractice. Again, to quote Judge Thomas Teague KC, in a letter to The Times on  7 May  this year, he said that the removal of
“any realistic prospect of an effective inquest...would magnify, rather than diminish, the obvious risks of deception and undue influence”.
I thank the hon. Member; she is making a very powerful speech. Does she share my concern about the removal of the coroner, as stated clearly by the Royal College of Pathologists, which speaks to her amendment?
I thank the hon. Member and I will come to that point very soon. I will now make some progress; I will not take any further interventions.
I struggle to see how removing automatic oversight of assisted deaths squares with a commitment to enact legislation with the “strongest safeguards in the world”. By doing so, the Bill sets a lower bar for scrutiny and review, and creates an information deficit. Put another way, we simply do not know what we do not know. Implementing a novel piece of legislation such as this without ensuring the most robust possible scrutiny of deaths taking place under the Act is astonishing. Under the Bill, assisted deaths would be the outlier, as any other intentionally procured death would automatically be reviewed by a coroner. Why should deaths under this legislation be any different?
Requiring automatic scrutiny from a coroner for assisted deaths should not be viewed as an add-on at the end of the process or perhaps just a safety net, although it is that.
Will the hon. Lady give way?
No, I have already said that I am not going take any further interventions. I have been very generous with my time.
It is imperative to consider the whole picture, particularly regarding malpractice or coercion—whether that be on the part of medical professionals, families or third parties. In written evidence to the Committee, Dr Rees Johnson, a legal expert from Essex Law School, highlights that, in some cultures,
“decision-making is a collective process involving family and community members.”
This approach, combined with the Bill’s provision for signing by proxy in clause 19, “potentially creates opportunities for coercion or abuse, particularly where family members have conflicting financial, social or emotional burdens.”
Without a coroner’s inquest, Dr Johnson notes that
“we would lose the ability to fully and properly investigate the possibility of where coercion or abuse took place”
in such culturally sensitive situations. Investigation of assisted deaths by coroners is not a luxury; it is a vital safeguard, without which people will fall through the cracks.
Will the hon. Lady give way?
No.
Beyond coercion, automatic inquests provide vital opportunities to identify other critical issues that may not otherwise be picked up. Without a coroner’s inquest, there would be no post-mortem examination. This is not merely an academic point; studies have shown that autopsy reveals that one in four cases have been misdiagnosed. Without this oversight, as His Honour Judge Thomas Teague KC, the former chief coroner, notes, there is
“no certain means of knowing whether the approved substance has led to a quick and painless death, or a lingering and distressing one, or even whether it had failed to cause death altogether and the deceased had been dispatched by manual asphyxiation or some other unlawful means.”
I am not sure whether that could be more clear. The view of experts in this area—both the Royal College of Pathologists and the former chief coroner of England and Wales—is that this Bill’s proposals, as drafted, are not fit for purpose. I strongly urge hon. Members to support my amendment (a) to new clause 15.
rose—
May I informally suggest that we aim for speeches of around six minutes? I call Paul Waugh to provide a good example.
I rise to speak in support of the amendment in my name, which seeks to strengthen new clause 14 tabled by my hon. Friend  the Member for Spen Valley (Kim Leadbeater) . Why do  we want to restrict advertising about assisted dying? It is not just because such adverts could appear crass or insensitive, or because we worry that private companies could profiteer from death, but because advertisers know that they influence choices. The issue of choice, whether it is informed choice, skewed choice, self-coercion or coercive control, as has already been mentioned, is, in many ways, at the heart of the Bill and whether its safeguards are sufficient.
My brother works in advertising and he knows its power. It is why companies spend billions of pounds  on it, why Google is the giant that it is, why we see  lots of adverts at Westminster tube station trying to  influence every single one of us, and why X is full of ads. Advertising works because we human beings are suggestible, and prone to messaging, visual cues and hints. Older people are bombarded with adverts for everything from stairlifts to care homes. One person’s advert, though, is another person’s public information campaign. It is not impossible to imagine a future Secretary of State, who passionately believes in the merits of assisted dying, authorising such a campaign. It could be a Government-approved plotline in a soap opera, or an ad read out by a podcaster that ever so subtly sounds like a news item, or even their own opinion. Many in this House rightly try to protect teenagers from online harms, but the online harm of an ad for a website about assisted dying shared on TikTok could be a reality without the tighter safeguards in my amendment.
